 0. Introduction

Since 2012, AI systems have achieved superhuman performance in an ever-growing
range of domains, including image recognition, text classification, and real-time
decision-making. However, early AI systems were narrow: they could only carry out the
tasks they were trained to perform. Until recently, a common view was that powerful
general-purpose AI systems required conceptual breakthroughs.

This view has been challenged in the last four years, and an increasing number of
frontier AI researchers now believe that general-purpose systems as broadly capable as
human beings – and perhaps significantly more so – could be developed in the near
future [8,15,16]. Such systems could potentially be used to design and even execute
catastrophic biological, chemical, or cyber attacks, or enable unprecedented
weaponized applications in swarm robotics. There is also reason to believe that they
may be uncontrollable if they are developed using current techniques, and could
behave adversarially to human beings by default [4,17,18]. This could potentially lead
to catastrophic accidents [1].

In the near future, advanced AI may therefore introduce extreme and global risks.
Without U.S. government action, weaponization or loss of control of advanced AI could
cause outcomes such as WMD-scale mass-casualty events or global destabilization.

In meeting these risks, the United States has several key advantages. First, the United
States and its allies control key nodes in the global AI supply chain. And second, the
world’s top AI labs are all currently based in the United States or in allied jurisdictions,
as are the world’s top AI safety experts. The latter are developing technical solutions
vital to addressing catastrophic risks from advanced AI, though their progress is
outpaced by advances in risk-generating AI capabilities.

The United States is uniquely positioned to accelerate progress in AI safety and
security,6 drive global consensus and cooperation on catastrophic AI risks, and temper
the racing dynamics that currently contribute to the unsafe development of frontier AI
systems. In the process, the United States can strike a balance between harnessing the



6 By AI safety and security, we mean the combination of AI alignment measures (ensuring AI systems,

including AGI-level systems, behave consistently with human intent) and AI security and containment
measures (safeguards against external attackers, insider threats, and unexpected behaviors by high-
capability AI systems). See the Glossary of terms for full definitions.


                                                                                            21 of 284
enormous opportunity that comes with advanced AI, and mitigating its unprecedented
risks, in a manner that protects the public interest.


0.1 Background

This section offers a brief overview of the technological state of play in advanced AI.
For a more comprehensive review of AI technology and catastrophic AI risks, readers
should refer to this plan’s companion document, Survey of AI R&D Trajectories [19].

Until the late 2010s, AI research was generally directed at improving the architectures
of AI systems, and finding new and better ways to configure and refine the information
processing structures they contained. This approach led to useful narrow AI systems,
which could perform the specific tasks they were trained to carry out. But these systems
did not have the ability to generalize and solve a wide range of problems, as human
beings do.

Towards the end of the decade, a then-fringe theory was proposed: perhaps current AI
techniques were already sufficient to allow researchers to build general-purpose
reasoning systems. Rather than refining AI system architectures, this theory suggested,
the key to general intelligence – and perhaps even to achieving human-level AGI – was
simply to “scale up” existing AI systems, training much larger models on far more data
with far more processing power. This idea has since become known as the scaling
hypothesis [20].

In late 2019, OpenAI placed an unprecedented bet on the scaling hypothesis [21]. The
result was GPT-3 [22], a text-generating model trained using more data and compute,
and composed of ten times more parameters, than any AI model before it. GPT-3
achieved remarkable performance on a variety of tasks: it could write code, translate
languages, compose essays, write effective marketing copy, and much more.

OpenAI’s experiments with AI scaling yielded such reliable improvements in
performance across so many orders of magnitude in dataset size, model size, and
compute budgets that they became known as scaling laws [23]. A resource-intensive,
industry-wide race to scale AI ensued. Today’s frontier AI labs are openly pursuing AGI
by using strategies centered on AI scaling, in some cases spending tens of billions of
dollars to acquire the AI computing resources needed to execute their ever-larger
training runs [10,24,25].

In early 2021, Google DeepMind proposed an improved set of AI scaling laws that
assigned a greater importance to dataset size than did OpenAI’s [26]. Since then, other


                                                                                 22 of 284
AI labs have developed still better scaling laws, training protocols, and AI system
architectures that have allowed ever more powerful systems to be developed using
fewer and fewer resources [27,28].

These AI systems now include OpenAI’s GPT-4, which can outperform the vast majority
of human beings at a wide range of standardized tests, from the SAT reading exam
(93rd percentile) to the SAT math test (89th percentile) to the Uniform Bar Exam (90th
percentile) [29]. The publicly accessible version of GPT-4 was widely recognized as the
world’s leading frontier AI system at the time of its release.7 And in December 2023,
Google DeepMind announced Gemini [30], a new AI system that rivals the capabilities
of GPT-4.

But the greater significance of these models lies in the improvements to AI capabilities
they demonstrate — improvements largely achieved by continued scaling. In early
2020, state-of-the-art AI systems struggled to string together more than a few coherent
sentences [31]. By 2021 [22], it could write high-school essays. By the end of 2022, a
single AI system could write professional-grade code, write entire plays, argue for or
against political perspectives, compose music, emulate operating systems, play text-
based games, and translate language [32]. As of early 2024, specialized AI systems can
discover new solutions to decades-old problems in mathematics [33], outperform
human experts on professional exams [29], and code apps from scratch with minimal
oversight [34].

Spurred by these advances, tech giants and private investors have poured billions of
dollars into frontier AI labs to fund AI scaling. In 2023 Microsoft invested over $10B in
OpenAI [35], while Google and Amazon together invested over $4B in Anthropic alone,
with an additional $2.5B in future commitments [36,37].

Many of these frontier labs have now stated openly and explicitly that their goal is to
build AGI [6,38,39], and in at least one case, to release it as open-source [40]. This goal
is viewed as justifying unprecedented levels of investment [25], given that the potential
returns could be substantial enough to transcend ordinary economics [6]. In principle
the first company to build AGI could have access to a system that could automate most
human labor, radically accelerate scientific progress, reshape entire industries, influence
global policy, and potentially, even define the future of humanity itself [41].




7 According to private sources, versions of GPT-4 that exist internally within OpenAI have even more

impressive capabilities.


                                                                                               23 of 284
With unprecedented funding in hand, frontier AI labs are now racing to build AI
systems with human-level or superhuman capabilities across a wide range of tasks
including situational awareness, advanced reasoning, and long-term planning. An
increasing number of frontier researchers now believe that AGI may be achieved within
the next 5 years, and perhaps considerably sooner [8,15,16].

Powerful AI systems will bring unprecedented value. But they may also introduce
extreme and catastrophic risks. The industry-wide and international race to build ever
more capable AI systems is taking place without regulatory oversight, even as we lack
reliable solutions to urgent and critical technical safety problems.


0.2 Categories of AI risk

See this plan’s companion document, Survey of AI R&D Trajectories, for more
information on these risk classes, including references.

Advanced AI, and ultimately AGI, introduces two distinct categories of catastrophic
risk.

0.2.1 Weaponization

The first risk class is weaponization. AI systems can and will be weaponized in many
ways, but future advanced AI systems may be WMD-like in their destructive capabilities
[1]. They could enable AI-powered mass cyberattacks that autonomously discover
crippling zero-day exploits [42], disinformation campaigns, and bioweapon design,
among many other dangerous applications [14, 43]. As a result, the proliferation of
such models – and indeed, even access to them – could be extremely dangerous
without effective measures to monitor and control their outputs.

0.2.2 Loss of control

The second risk class is loss of control due to AGI alignment failure. There is evidence
to suggest that as advanced AI approaches AGI-like levels of human- and superhuman
general capability, it may become effectively uncontrollable. Specifically, in the absence
of countermeasures, a highly capable AI system may engage in so-called power-
seeking behaviors. These behaviors could include strategies to prevent itself from
being shut off or from having its goals modified, which could include various forms of
deception; establishing control over its environment; improving itself in various ways;
and accumulating resources. Even today’s most advanced AI systems may be


                                                                                 24 of 284
displaying early signs of such behavior, and some have demonstrated the capacity [44]
and propensity [45] for deception and long-term planning.8 Though power-seeking
remains an active area of research, evidence for it stems from empirical and theoretical
studies published at the world’s top AI conferences [2,47].

If a power-seeking AGI were to have internal goals that differed even slightly from
those of its developers, executing competently on those goals could involve placing
itself outside the effective control of its developers to avoid having its goals altered.
Given the potential capabilities of such a system, in the worst case such a loss of
control could pose an extinction-level threat to the human species. Because of this risk,
major frontier labs have highlighted the crucial importance of ensuring that the
behavior of an AGI is always consistent with — or aligned with — the intent of its
developers [5]. However, there is currently no known method to accomplish this. This
unsolved technical challenge is known as the alignment problem9 [1], and it is
believed to be central to the safe development and operation of future, superhuman AI
systems.10 See Annex B: The full challenge of AGI alignment for more information.

Loss of control from AGI alignment failure makes no reference to questions of
consciousness or sentience of AI systems. A misaligned AGI system is a source of
catastrophic risk simply because it is a highly competent optimizer. Its competence lets
it discover and implement dangerously creative strategies to achieve its internalized
goals, and most effective strategies to achieve most types of goals likely involve power-
seeking behaviors [48]. As a result, a highly competent AI system may tend to engage
in such behaviors by default under a wide range of circumstances.

This risk category has several implications. First, AGI may lack the build-vs-use
distinction that exists for many other WMD-like technologies. Successfully building an
AGI system, even without choosing to deploy it, could have a catastrophic impact if the
system escapes controls and circumvents its safeguards. And second, which human
agency designs, develops, or deploys an AGI system may be immaterial. If the AGI
system escapes the control of its developer, then the developer’s goals or intent can no
longer affect the outcome. In these respects, the risk profile of AGI is unusual, but not
unique. Certain kinds of biological weapons research present similar risks: even if there


8 Many frontier AI labs view long-term planning capabilities as intrinsically dangerous [46].


9 See the Glossary of terms for more information.


10 Recently, some frontier labs have begun using the term “superalignment” to refer to the alignment

problem in the context of human-level and superhuman AI systems (i.e., AGI) [5]. It is generally believed
that today’s alignment techniques will not scale to such systems.


                                                                                                25 of 284
is no intent to deploy, simply conducting active research on a pathogen runs some risk
that the pathogen could escape containment (LOE5, 5.3.1).

See Annex C: Example AI alignment failure scenarios for illustrations of the escalating
impact potential of misaligned AI systems with increasing capabilities.

0.2.3 Other risk categories

Apart from weaponization and loss of control, advanced AI introduces other risks of
varying likelihood and impact. These include, among others:

    ● Dangerous failures induced intentionally by adversaries;

    ● Biased outputs that disadvantage certain individuals or groups;

    ● Prosaic accidents like self-driving car crashes;

    ● Exotic accidents due to interactions between complex networks of
      interdependent AI systems that may lead to cascading failures (“network risk”);
      and

    ● Unpredictable and uncontrollable technological change that could itself
      destabilize society in ways we cannot anticipate [1].

All these risks are important to consider and should be addressed. However, this
action plan focuses on risks from weaponization and loss of control. These two
categories contribute disproportionately to the possibility of unrecoverable
catastrophic risks,11 and their mitigations pose unique technical, political, legal, and
economic challenges (see 0.5) [49].




11 By unrecoverable catastrophic risks, we mean risks whose worst-case impact is so severe that it

would have a profound and irreversible effect on society. See the Glossary of terms for our full definition.


                                                                                                  26 of 284
0.2.4 Risks addressed by this action plan




Figure 2. Visualization of an approximate spectrum of AI risks, ranging from individual and
societal risks to catastrophic national security risks.

The safeguards we will propose in this action plan are aimed at addressing
catastrophic risks from weaponization and loss of control. Many safeguards are
mutually supportive between these two risk categories. But loss of control from AGI
alignment failure is a particularly challenging risk category that requires some
mitigations beyond those for weaponization. A subset of our recommendations is
therefore primarily aimed at addressing loss of control from AGI alignment failure.

Currently, only a small and well-capitalized subset of the AI industry is engaged in
activities that could introduce catastrophic risk. The majority of AI research,
development, and adoption efforts are purely beneficial. Approaches to mitigating
catastrophic AI risks should therefore be carefully scoped to minimize regulatory
burdens on safe and beneficial activities. A balanced approach should encourage U.S.
innovation to thrive, promote safe and secure development, and enable the public to
benefit from increasing AI adoption.


0.3 Potential sources of catastrophic AI risk

We assess that medium-term risk (1-5 years) from the weaponization and loss of control
of advanced AI systems may come from a limited set of sources. See Annex D:
Advanced AI landscape for a breakdown of the entities associated with each of the
sources below.




                                                                                       27 of 284
Some potential medium-term risk sources are:

    ● Domestic frontier AI programs. Frontier AI programs at U.S.-based
      organizations represent a significant source of advanced AI risk. These
      organizations respond to market incentives and other competitive pressures by
      building and deploying ever-more powerful AI systems as quickly as they can
      (see 0.5.3.1). Over the medium term, this category includes frontier AI labs and
      elite quantitative hedge funds.

    ● Foreign AI programs. State and non-state actors abroad could be engaged in
      research on the critical path to AGI. China-based entities are currently the most
      notable candidates in this category, but this could change.

    ● Theft or sale and subsequent augmentation of frontier AI models by state or
      non-state actors. Frontier AI labs generally lack the operational, cyber, and
      physical security to protect themselves from nation-state espionage (see
      0.5.1.5). If an attacker steals a highly capable AI model from a frontier lab, that
      attacker can then augment the model’s capabilities and “train out” any existing
      safeguards against alignment failure or weaponization [50]. This leads to a
      system with risks or capabilities that were not present in the original model.

    ● Open-access12 release of advanced AI models. When an AI developer
      publishes the weights of a powerful model, anyone can download the full
      model, and then package or fine-tune it to augment its capabilities. The key
      driver of risk from open-access release is the widespread availability of the
      weights of models that could be weaponized or pose loss of control risk under
      augmentation (see 0.5.1.6). Advanced AI model weights have also been leaked
      accidentally in some cases [51].




12 By open-access, we mean AI models whose weights are generally available for download under a

permissive license. This also includes activities commonly referred to as “open-source.” See the Glossary
of terms for more information.


                                                                                               28 of 284
Figure 3. Visualization of the AI supply chain, potential sources of catastrophic risk, and
categories of catastrophic risk.


0.4 Arguments against regulation for catastrophic AI risk

Several compelling arguments have been made against U.S. government regulation of
advanced AI for catastrophic risk mitigation. We list a few of these below.

0.4.1 Self-regulation will be suf cient

Some technology executives have argued that catastrophic AI risk can be mitigated
through self-regulation and coordination among the AI industry [34]. Major AI
developers and cloud providers have created the Frontier Model Forum (FMF) [52]
partly as a self-regulatory industry body. Opinions on regulation differ between frontier
labs, with some privately and publicly [53] endorsing the idea, and others objecting.
Indeed, according to sources contacted over the course of this assessment, at least one


                                                                                          29 of 284
                               fi
major cloud provider’s opposition has been made clear by attempts on its part to curb
regulatory efforts.

Self-regulation may be enough to mitigate many types of AI risk, and it is likely to have
some positive effect even on certain forms of catastrophic risk. But it will not offer
adequate protection from weaponization or loss of control risk, for a number of
reasons.

First, frontier AI labs face an intense and immediate incentive to scale their AI systems
as fast as they can (see 0.5.3.1). They do not face an immediate incentive to invest in
safety or security measures that do not deliver direct economic benefits, even though
some do out of genuine concern. Catastrophic AI risk safeguards are perceived to
impose a cost on the lab that applies them, while the benefit they deliver is a common
good. As a result, adequate private investment in catastrophic AI risk mitigation is best
incentivized by regulation.

Second, frontier AI labs assess their AI systems for dangerous behaviors by
administering AI evaluations13 [46]. In a self-regulatory regime, these labs face a strong
incentive to mitigate dangerous behaviors through superficial adjustments (e.g., fine-
tuning a model to give better answers on the evaluation set) rather than by addressing
the underlying factors that may have led to the behavior. This makes self-evaluated AI
systems appear safer than they are. As a result, reliable AI evaluations — considered an
essential component of technical AI safety in the current paradigm — require
regulatory oversight [54]. See LOE3, 3.2 for more information on standards for AI
evaluations.

Finally, frontier AI labs lack access to classified threat intelligence. As a result, they
often do not implement the security measures required to secure their critical
intellectual property (IP) from exfiltration by resourced state and non-state attackers
(see 0.5.1.5). Access to these resources requires ongoing collaboration and
coordination with government stakeholders.

0.4.2 Regulation could damage U.S. innovation and
competitiveness

Up to this point, AI has been disproportionately a beneficial technology. Adding
friction to advanced AI development through regulation risks denying society the

13 By AI evaluations, we mean attempts to elicit behaviors and gauge the propensities of AI systems

through various means. See the Glossary of terms for a full definition.


                                                                                             30 of 284
benefits of continued unimpeded progress in the field. Moreover, it has been
suggested that catastrophic risk mitigation policies could undermine U.S.
competitiveness, both economically and strategically, vis-à-vis its adversaries [55].
These are both genuine and valid concerns.

Safeguards on advanced AI will need to both support innovation and defend national
security. To strike the optimal balance, we recommend against regulation on the AI
sector as a whole. Instead, the U.S. government could work through the private sector
to address many AI-related issues.14 However, there is a distinct category of
catastrophic AI national security threats that parallel the grave dangers posed by WMD,
stemming from weaponization (see 0.2.1) and loss of control (see 0.2.2). The private
sector is incapable by itself of adequately managing this threat category (see 0.4.1), so
the U.S. government should intervene with common sense safeguards.

While these safeguards will have an effect on the innovation ecosystem, a number of
approaches can mitigate its impact. First, regulations can be carefully scoped to target
the activities that entail catastrophic AI risks, while minimizing their impact on activities
that do not entail such risks (LOE1, 1.3.2 and LOE4, 4.1.3). Second, effective early
warning systems, (LOE1, 1.2 and LOE2, 2.3) coupled with emergency response
mechanisms (LOE2, 2.4 and LOE4, 4.2.3) and regulatory flexibility (LOE1, 1.3.2 and
LOE4, 4.1.2.4), could improve safety margins enough to ease some day-to-day
regulatory burdens. Finally, safety is a precondition of effective innovation. Research
and implementation of standards for safe AI scaling (LOE3, 3.1 and 3.2) may ultimately
accelerate responsible progress.

Apart from its economic effects, there is also a concern that regulation could cause U.S.
AI technology to fall behind that of its adversaries. For example, controls on U.S.
domestic AI industry could lead to private-sector investment in AI being redirected
abroad, or otherwise allow adversaries to overtake U.S. AI. We believe this risk can be
mitigated through a combination of approaches. These include broad-based controls
on the AI supply chain (LOE1, 1.5; LOE5, 5.5); ongoing monitoring of the global AI
landscape (LOE1, 1.2 and LOE2, 2.3) combined with contingency planning (LOE2, 2.4);
domestic laws and regulations to encourage AI development and adoption under
responsible conditions (LOE4, 4.1 and 4.2); education and outreach to international
partners (LOE5, 5.2.1); and a campaign to internationalize AI safeguards globally
(LOE5, 5.3 and 5.4).


14 For example, federal agencies could strategically leverage their procurement of commercial solutions

to shape the market, ensure personnel have adequate training, and update their internal policies to
safeguard privacy and civil rights in the application of AI tools in federal functions.


                                                                                               31 of 284
Moreover, under current conditions of frontier lab security, it is likely that many well-
resourced state and non-state actors can access the weights of frontier AI models
developed in the United States already (see 0.5.1.5). Until frontier AI lab security is
hardened, U.S. AI progress can be expected to translate directly into adversary AI
capabilities. Additionally, U.S. and other Western open-access AI development can be
leveraged immediately by adversaries. Finally, the catastrophic impact of a loss of
control event in an AI system (see 0.2.2) is agnostic to which entity has designed,
developed, or deployed that AI system. No AI developer, regardless of competitive
alignment, can currently assure the safe operation of an AI system beyond certain as-
yet unknown capability bounds (see 0.5.1.4).

0.4.3 Catastrophic AI risk could divert attention from other issues

Another concern is that focusing on extreme and catastrophic AI risks could divert
resources away from other AI issues, such as ethical and social justice challenges
introduced by the technology [56]. The U.S. government will indeed face the challenge
of balancing a large portfolio of pressing issues associated with accelerating AI
progress. But advanced AI weaponization and loss of control introduce WMD-scale
mass-casualty risks (see 0.5.1.1) [19], and should be afforded resources proportionate
to the profound national security threats they represent.

0.4.4 Catastrophic AI risk mitigation is unnecessary

Some AI researchers and other public figures have indicated that they believe
catastrophic AI risk mitigation is unnecessary. In the current public discourse, this
position is primarily represented by two views with separate lines of argument.

First, not all AI researchers agree that catastrophic risk from AGI is significant. Skeptics
include, among others, Meta Chief AI Scientist — and one of the “godfathers” of deep
learning — Yann LeCun [57]; and Google Brain founder Andrew Ng [58]. Both of these
prominent researchers have argued that the risk from AI is lower than that from most
other potential causes of human extinction for several reasons, including that humans
may be able to exercise more agency in the outcome than many believe [59,60]. While
these views could ultimately prove correct, numerous other mainstream AI researchers
(including founders of the field), practitioners, and U.S. and other government officials
have voiced serious and credible concern with respect to the possibility of catastrophic
outcomes from advanced AI development (see 0.5.1.1). In light of all the available
evidence, we currently assess that despite the substantial uncertainty (see 0.5.1.3), the



                                                                                    32 of 284
worst case outcomes are plausible and severe enough to justify substantial mitigation
efforts.

A second, separate argument against catastrophic AI risk mitigation has been
advanced by Richard Sutton, the founder of the field of reinforcement learning and a
distinguished research scientist at Google DeepMind [61]. Sutton’s position is that
humanity’s replacement by powerful AI systems is inevitable, but instead of risk
mitigation, he has advocated for “succession planning,” the idea that humans should
hand over their agency and control to AGIs intentionally. Google cofounder Larry Page
has also expressed a similar view in the past [62].

In general, given the current information environment (see 0.5.2.2), messaging on AI
risk mitigation should be as grounded and carefully calibrated as possible.


0.5 Challenges

The U.S. government faces several unique challenges in its efforts to address
catastrophic risk from advanced AI. These challenges cut across technical, political,
economic, and legal domains. These challenges — particularly the severity of the threat
(see 0.5.1.1), the rapid pace of change relative to ordinary policy (see 0.5.1.2 and
0.5.2.1), and the irreversibility of certain forms of AI supply chain proliferation (see
0.5.1.6 and 0.5.3.2) — combine to necessitate a system of overlapping controls
consistent with the defense in depth strategy we follow in the Action plan.

0.5.1 Technical challenges

0.5.1.1 The worst-case outcomes for AI risk are considered both
plausible and extremely severe

A growing number of experts believe that, if developed, AGI could create
unrecoverable catastrophic risks up to and including the risk of human extinction.
Despite the controversial nature of such a prediction, numerous AI researchers and
practitioners (including founders of the field) — and some U.S. government officials —
have publicly stated that they believe such extreme outcomes to be plausible. For
example:

   ● Geoff Hinton, a so-called “godfather” of deep learning, left Google in early
     2023 in order to speak freely about AI risk concerns [63]. Hinton believes there is




                                                                                33 of 284
      a 10% chance that AI will lead to complete human extinction within the next 30
      years [64,65].

   ● Yoshua Bengio is another of the “godfathers” of deep learning. Bengio has
     estimated a 20% chance of a catastrophic outcome from AI at some point in the
     future [65,66].

   ● Lina Khan is the Chair of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). She has stated
     that she believes there is a 15% chance that all humans will be killed by AI
     [65,67].

   ● Dario Amodei is the CEO and cofounder of U.S. frontier AI lab Anthropic.
     Amodei has placed the likelihood of a civilizational catastrophe due to AI at
     10-25% [65,68].

   ● Jan Leike co-leads the OpenAI Superalignment team which is attempting to
     discover effective techniques for aligning superhuman systems by 2027. Leike
     has stated that the chance of a “very bad” (in context, catastrophic) outcome
     from AI could be anywhere between 10% and 90% [69].

   ● Paul Christiano is the former Head of Alignment at OpenAI. Christiano believes
     there is a 50% chance that all humans will be killed relatively soon after human-
     level AI systems are developed [70].

   ● Elon Musk founded and financed AGI startup xAI in 2023. Musk has stated that
     he believes the probability of an “existential” catastrophe from AI is around
     20-30% [71].

   ● In October 2023, nonprofit organization AI Impacts conducted a survey of 2778
     AI researchers who had recently published in one of six top AI journals or
     conferences. Over half of participants believed there is a greater than 10%
     chance that an AI loss of control event will lead to human extinction or to a
     similarly permanent impact on human welfare [72].

Moreover, these risks are now recognized by governments around the world. For
example:

   ● In 2022, the bipartisan Global Catastrophic Risk Management Act was enacted
     by Congress. The Act recognizes the potential “catastrophic risks” associated
     with the weaponization of AI and other emerging technologies [73].


                                                                               34 of 284
   ● In June 2022, the United Kingdom’s Ministry of Defence published its Defense
     AI Strategy, in which it referenced the “existential risks” that may arise from
     technologies such as AI [74].

   ● In November 2023, representatives from the United States, United Kingdom,
     China, and 25 other countries signed the Bletchley Declaration, which stated
     that, “Substantial risks may arise from potential intentional misuse or unintended
     issues of control relating to alignment with human intent. These issues are in
     part because those capabilities are not fully understood and are therefore hard
     to predict. We are especially concerned by such risks in domains such as
     cybersecurity and biotechnology, as well as where frontier AI systems may
     amplify risks such as disinformation. There is potential for serious, even
     catastrophic, harm, either deliberate or unintentional, stemming from the most
     significant capabilities of these AI models” [75].

   ● Also in November 2023, Vice President of the United States Kamala Harris noted
     that, “from AI-enabled cyberattacks at a scale beyond anything we have seen
     before to AI-formulated bio-weapons that could endanger the lives of millions,
     these threats are often referred to as the ‘existential threats of AI’ because, of
     course, they could endanger the very existence of humanity” [76].

Finally, technical personnel at multiple frontier AI labs have expressed similar concerns
in private communications. One individual at a well-known AI lab expressed the view
that, if a specific next-generation AI model were ever released as open-access, this
would be “horribly bad”, because the model’s potential persuasive capabilities could
“break democracy” if they were ever leveraged in areas such as election interference or
voter manipulation.

0.5.1.2 Timescales for catastrophic risk are uncertain

AGI is generally viewed as the primary driver of catastrophic risk from loss of control.
But there is no clear consensus on when AGI will be developed. As of December 2023,
OpenAI, Google DeepMind, Anthropic, and NVIDIA have all stated publicly that
human-level or superhuman AGI could be built within 5 years, by 2028 [5–8,77]. On the
other hand, an October 2023 survey of AI researchers forecasted only a 50% chance
that all human labor would be automated by the year 2116, nearly nine decades later
[72].




                                                                                 35 of 284
The divergence in forecasts between frontier labs and academics has been a source of
controversy. While frontier AI labs have more up-to-date information about the true
state of progress in the field,15 they may also face incentives to exaggerate their near-
term capabilities. This can make frontier labs’ shorter estimates challenging to
interpret.

To partially address this problem, in December 2023 we asked several technical sources
across multiple frontier labs to privately share their personal estimates of the chance
that an AI incident could lead to global and irreversible effects, sometime during the
calendar year 2024. The lowest estimate we received was 4%; the highest extended as
far as 20%.16 These estimates were collected informally and likely subject to significant
bias, but they all originated from technically informed individuals working at the frontier
of AI capabilities. Technical experts inside frontier labs also expressed that the AGI
timelines messaged externally by frontier labs were consistent with those labs’ internal
assessments.

Disagreements over AGI timelines pose a legitimate challenge to policymaking. Risk
mitigation measures that can be deployed quickly could ultimately prove harmful if AGI
is decades or more away (see 0.4.2). On the other hand, better-calibrated approaches
could minimize economic impacts, but be too slow to address risks that could emerge
on shorter timescales.

0.5.1.3 The degree of risk from loss of control is uncertain

There is significant uncertainty with respect to loss of control risk from AGI alignment
failure. A major challenge in assessing this risk is that it is only expected to fully emerge
in future AI systems with as-yet unobserved capabilities. Since there is no direct
empirical evidence that a future AGI system will behave dangerously in this way, loss of
controls is sometimes referred to as a vague or speculative risk. But this argument
applies even more strongly in reverse: there is no direct empirical evidence that a
future AGI system will behave safely, and there are far more ways for a highly capable


15 This is especially true in recent years, as frontier labs publish fewer and fewer details of their most

advanced AI systems in an effort to maximize their proprietary advantages. The difference between
OpenAI’s GPT-3 paper [22] and its GPT-4 technical report [29] is one clear example of this trend.

16 As a point of comparison for the low-end 4% estimate, intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) were

first widely deployed 50 years ago, estimating conservatively. Since there has not been a nuclear war in
that time, this makes the naive annualized probability of nuclear war around 1/50, or ~2% [78].
Therefore, by even the lowest of these estimates, 2024 would be the first calendar year in which AGI
development could arguably pose a greater threat to global safety and security than nuclear war.


                                                                                                     36 of 284
AI system to behave dangerously than to behave safely.

Without direct empirical evidence of AGI behavior, we need to rely on theoretical
arguments guided by experiments on today’s less capable AI systems. This body of
evidence has significant limitations. We describe it at greater length in [19], but it
includes theoretical arguments for power-seeking behavior in several categories of AI
systems [2,47] backed by some limited empirical studies [79,44]. It also includes
arguments that AGI failure modes may be challenging to predict and address [80],
along with some early empirical evidence [81]. And it includes evidence of alignment
failures in frontier AI systems, even in the presence of cutting-edge safeguards [82,83],
and of AI systems actively deceiving their users without having been trained to do so
[45].

Many frontier AI researchers with domain expertise in AI safety, and an absolute
majority of AI researchers in general, believe this risk to be significant (see 0.5.1.1). But
this majority view still falls short of a consensus, and several leading figures in AI still
disagree that the risk justifies action (see 0.4.4).

Uncertainty is often a poor guide to policy. But in the case of advanced AI, the worst-
case impact of dangerous behavior is sufficiently severe(see 0.5.1.1) and near-term (see
0.5.1.2) that even a relatively minor chance of such an outcome should carry
meaningful weight in a risk assessment.

0.5.1.4 Frontier labs lack safety and security measures to detect and
prevent loss of control

Some frontier AI labs have publicly stated that they currently lack the ability to control
or contain the behavior of dangerously powerful models that they aim to develop in
the near future [5,84]. For example, OpenAI’s Superalignment Team co-lead has said
that his team’s objective — solving AGI alignment by 2027 — is “a very ambitious goal,
and we might not succeed” [85]. There is currently no technical consensus on the true
difficulty of aligning AGI-level systems [7], though the problem has features that
suggest it may be extremely challenging. See Annex B: The full challenge of AGI
alignment for more information.

Apart from the fundamental challenge of aligning an AGI-level system, researchers at
several major frontier labs have indicated in private conversations that they do not
believe their organizations are likely to implement the measures necessary to prevent
loss of control over powerful, misaligned AI systems they may develop internally. In one
case, a researcher indicated that their lab’s perceived lax approach to safety reflected a


                                                                                     37 of 284
trade-off between safety and security on the one hand, and research velocity on the
other. The same source said they expected their lab to continue to prioritize
development velocity over safety and security. Another individual expressed the
opinion that their lab’s safety team was effectively racing its capabilities teams, to avoid
the possibility that they may develop AGI-level systems before being able to control
them. A third frontier AI researcher expressed skepticism at the effectiveness of their
lab's model containment protocols, despite their lab's internal belief that they may
achieve AGI in the relatively near term.

As one example of lax containment practices, researchers at one well known frontier
lab performed experiments on a newly trained, cutting-edge AI system that involved
significant augmentation of the system’s capability surface and autonomy. These
experiments were unmonitored at the time they were performed, were conducted
before the system’s overall capability surface was well-understood, and did not include
measures to contain the impact of potential uncontrolled behavior by the system.

Loss of control from AGI alignment failure appears highly unlikely to occur in present-
day AI systems (see 0.5.1.3). But the level of internal concern at many frontier labs [54]
reflects the assumption that the continuing acceleration of AI capabilities means such
risks could emerge with little warning. In private conversations, frontier researchers
have expressed concern that they may not be able to detect and correct alignment
problems in future, more powerful models before they are deployed. They also shared
their concern that if such models were deployed, it may be impossible to intercede
quickly enough to prevent significant and potentially irreversible harms.

On the other hand, multiple researchers have also privately expressed optimism that
the necessary measures could be developed and implemented if frontier labs had
enough time, and a stronger safety culture than they currently do (see 0.5.3.1).

0.5.1.5 Frontier labs lack suf cient security to prevent critical IP theft

By the private judgment of many of their own technical staff, the security measures in
place at many frontier AI labs are inadequate to resist a sustained IP exfiltration
campaign by a sophisticated attacker. When asked for examples of dangerous gaps in
security measures at their frontier lab, a member of the lab’s technical staff indicated
that they had many to share, but that they were not permitted to do so. The same
individual shared that their lab's lax approach to information security was the object of
a running joke: their lab, its staff apparently say, is doing more to accelerate
adversaries' AI research than the adversaries themselves.



                                                                                    38 of 284
                      fi
Conversations with leading frontier labs have corroborated that many lack an
institutional appreciation of necessary security practices.

Given the current state of frontier lab security, it seems likely that such model
exfiltration attempts are likely to succeed absent direct U.S. government support, if
they have not already.

0.5.1.6 Open-access development can elicit dangerous capabilities
from previously safe AI models

A given AI model is far more dangerous under open-access conditions than it is under
closed-access conditions [86,87]. This is partly because threat actors who have full
development access to the model can retrain it for a very low cost and thereby undo its
built-in technical controls [88,89]. But on top of this, threat actors can also fine-tune an
open-access AI model or augment it with tools, and extend its capabilities
unpredictably — sometimes far beyond the original’s [90,91]. By one estimate, a
model’s capabilities can be extended by 1-2 orders of magnitude of compute on
specific behaviors through fine-tuning [92].17 Moreover, AI labs regularly release open-
access AI models whose capabilities are not fully characterized, meaning that threat
actors may not even need to augment a model at all to access dangerous capabilities.

This means that a model that is generally safe at the time its weights are shared could
still be fine-tuned by a bad actor for various weaponized applications that would be
beyond the capability of the original model, including bioweapon design, cyber
warfare, and large-scale disinformation campaigns. Moreover, AI labs regularly release
open-access AI models whose capabilities are not fully characterized [93], meaning that
threat actors may not need to augment a model at all to access dangerous capabilities.

Once a model has been released under open-access, there are no realistic means of
shutting it down or adding restrictions. This means controls on open-access models
need to be applied before a dangerous release occurs.

See Annex D, D.3 for information on the major developers of open-access AI models.



17 In other words, if the original developer trained an AI model with 10^24 OP of compute (10^24 total

operations), an open-source community with access to its weights could plausibly fine-tune it for specific
tasks until it has similar performance on those tasks as would a model trained with 10^25 to 10^26 OP
of compute (10^25 to 10^26 total operations). These numbers are very rough estimates based on the
open-source activity related to Meta AI’s Llama and Llama 2 models.


                                                                                                 39 of 284
     0.5.1.7 Closed-access AI models are vulnerable to black-box
     ex ltration and other attacks

     Advanced AI models have repeatedly had their safety features subverted (“jailbroken”)
     by security researchers with no access to the model’s weights [94,95]. Future jailbreaks
     could enable malicious actors to leverage even legitimate AI systems to support
     weaponization use cases like cyber warfare and bioweapon design, using only models
     that are accessible through secure application programming interfaces (APIs) or user
     interfaces like ChatGPT [96,97]. Moreover, it is also possible to replicate many of the
     capabilities of a powerful AI system at far lower cost, by training a second AI system on
     the outputs of the first [98]. This means if a closed-access AI system is made available
     for use through an API or user interface, the system’s operator should monitor usage
     for patterns that could indicate weaponization [43] or black-box exfiltration.

     0.5.2 Political challenges

     0.5.2.1 AI advances faster than the ordinary policy process

     The pace of development in advanced AI is faster than any government's ability to
     respond through most ordinary policy mechanisms. When ChatGPT brought advanced
     AI to the attention of policymakers and the public in late 2022, frontier AI models could
     achieve a 10% score on the Uniform Bar Exam (UBE) [29]; write modest quantities of
     reasonably high-quality code [99]; and generate art and photorealistic images [100].
     Just over a year later, the public frontier of AI capabilities has completely transformed.
     Leading AI models outperform average human professionals across a wide range of
     professional exams (including the UBE, with scores up to 90%) [29]; can write entire
     applications with minimal human oversight [34]; and generate photorealistic video clips
     [101].

     Though the forecast remains uncertain (see 0.5.1.2), there is reason to expect AI
     progress in the coming years to continue at its current pace or even to accelerate.
     Relative to this pace of progress, legislative and executive response times are far
     slower. This difference in timescale creates a “regulatory policy lag” that poses a
     fundamental challenge to reactive regulation. In order for policy or legislation to
     successfully address the relevant national security threats, it must either proactively
     anticipate future problems and capabilities, or delegate sufficient authorities to
     regulatory bodies to ensure timely reactions to new risks as they emerge.




                                                                                        40 of 284
fi
0.5.2.2 The information environment around advanced AI makes
grounded conversations challenging

Heightened attention on AI risk has increased public support for U.S. government
action, with 67% of a bipartisan sample in one poll expressing concern that the
regulatory response to AI could be insufficient [102]. However, since GPT-4’s release in
early 2023, the information environment surrounding advanced AI has become
polarized in other ways. For example, AGI alignment risk has been one of the focus
areas of the effective altruism (EA) movement, a philosophical movement that emerged
at Oxford University (U.K.) in the early 2010s [103]. Due to its early work in the field, the
EA movement makes up a large fraction of advocates for extreme AI risk mitigation
[104]. More recently, the EA movement has been noted for its political influence and
donations [105].18 See Annex E: Funding in AI safety for more information about
relevant entities and their donations.

The EA movement has led to the emergence of a reactionary movement known as
effective accelerationism (stylized as e/acc), that increased in prominence during 2023
[106]. In contrast to EA, proponents of e/acc call for the unrestricted development of AI
and self-regulation of AI companies (see 0.4.1), and generally dismiss arguments for
catastrophic risk (see 0.4.4) [107]. The e/acc movement is sometimes associated with
transhumanism, which advocates for the merging of human beings and machines [108].
Both the EA and the e/acc movements enjoy considerable support from wealthy Silicon
Valley backers [107].

The polarization of advanced AI risk, combined with the genuine uncertainties
surrounding the topic (see 0.5.1.3), increases the challenge of sustaining technically
informed conversations on this issue in the public sphere. We recommend U.S.
government personnel ensure their awareness of the subject matter is grounded in an
up-to-date technical understanding (see LOE2, 2.2) to ensure productive engagement
with relevant stakeholders and the public.




18 For information about the sources of financial support for this assessment and its authors, see our

Funding disclosure.


                                                                                                 41 of 284
0.5.3 Economic and strategic challenges

0.5.3.1 Frontier labs face strong incentives to develop and deploy
increasingly advanced AI systems with limited safeguards

All three of the main frontier AI labs (see Annex D, D.1) have at least a basic awareness
of the catastrophic risk potential of the AI systems they are building. But all are
currently locked in a competitive race [109] that has eroded each individual
organization’s agency with respect to the safety and security considerations that they
themselves believe are necessary (see 0.5.1.4 and 0.5.1.5). By the private judgment of
many of their own technical AI safety staff, none of these organizations is currently
investing in AI and AGI safety to the degree that would be needed to adequately offset
its respective investment in AI capabilities. The race dynamic between these labs
originates from a combination of economic competition and a genuine institutional
belief within each organization that it, and not its competitors, would be the best
steward of an eventual AGI system if and when one is developed [110].

The incentives driving this race are intensified by the potential for extreme winner-take-
all effects. Frontier AI labs that fall behind perceive that they may find themselves at a
permanent disadvantage [10], while the lab that is the first to achieve an AGI-level
capability might — if it avoids causing a catastrophic outcome (see 0.5.1.1 and 0.5.1.3)
— enjoy unprecedented windfall profits.19

These winner-take-all effects are reinforced even further by the possibility that future AI
systems could themselves be used to accelerate frontier AI research and development.
Some frontier labs have already begun experimenting with forms of AI-supported AI
research [69,111]. If this approach succeeds, it could lead to an accelerating dynamic in
which progress in AI produces rapidly compounding returns beyond a certain critical
capability level [112].20

Private conversations with frontier researchers clearly indicate that this possibility is
taken seriously inside leading labs.



19 We mean “profits” here in the sense of “excess value” rather than defining it in purely monetary

terms.

20 The use of AI systems to automate AI research may also introduce particularly acute risks from AGI

alignment failure. See Annex B: The full challenge of AGI alignment for more information about the risks
of automated AI research.


                                                                                               42 of 284
Because of these factors, under the present self-regulating regime (see 0.4.1) frontier
AI labs face strong incentives to compromise on safety and security in a number of
critical areas. For example, in performing self-evaluations of their AI models for
dangerous behaviors, frontier labs may be motivated to make their models appear
safer than they are. Indeed, according to individuals with direct experience conducting
safety evaluations on frontier models, this has already begun to occur. One frontier
researcher shared that, although their lab was being reasonably cautious with its AI
evaluations, they ultimately expect it to follow institutional financial incentives to game
evaluations. (See LOE3, 3.2.1 for more information on the technical limitations of AI
evaluations.)

As the capabilities of AI systems increase in the future, additional risks — driven by the
same sets of incentives as above — could surface at the intersection of frontier lab
interests, national security, and the democratic process. For example, many AI
researchers believe that future AI systems could develop persuasive capabilities that
match or exceed those of the most skilled humans [113,114]. If such systems were
developed, they could be used to influence the views of regulators, legislators,
policymakers, and voters in any number of ways. See Annex F: Persuasion and
manipulation for more information on this category of AI capabilities and the
associated risks.

0.5.3.2 AI supply chain proliferation cannot be mitigated after the fact




        Figure 4. Simplified representation of the components of the AI supply chain.

Some parts of the supply chain for advanced AI are unusually prone to proliferation
risk. The irreversibility of open-access model releases, and the risk of their subsequent
augmentation, may be the most visible example (see 0.5.1.6).

More generally, several nodes in the advanced AI supply chain can produce outputs
without the need for high-cost consumable inputs. To use an open-access AI model for
inference, for example, requires only electrical energy as a consumable input. The AI



                                                                                        43 of 284
model itself is not consumed, so it can be used for any number of subsequent
inferences.

Similarly, an AI data center,21 while expensive to build, can be used to train or augment
any number of advanced AI models. To use an existing AI data center to train AI
models requires primarily electricity and water for cooling, which are low-cost
commodities [115]. The AI data center itself is not consumed,22 so it can be used to
train or augment AI models effectively unrestricted.

AI model training and inference generally do not require high-cost consumables. The
high-cost items in this supply chain are the AI model and the AI data center. Supply
chain controls on these activities would primarily apply to these high-cost items,
because low-cost commodities like electricity and water are impractical to control. But
even if controls are enacted on these items, existing AI data centers can still be used
for training, and existing AI models can still be used for inference. And entities that
expect to be subject to controls on these items in the future can also anticipate
restrictions by stockpiling them in advance [117].

As a result, supply chain controls on AI training and inference inputs will have a delayed
rather than immediate impact. Instead of directly interrupting the flow of a
consumable, controls will take effect over time through wear and tear and erosion of
competitiveness of the controlled capital goods. This means supply chain controls in
this area will be less effective as a reactive measure than they may be in other sectors.
By the time a proliferation risk is recognized, it could be too late for such controls to
make a difference.

In the case of AI training and inference, this factor is compounded by an even greater
challenge. Improvements in AI algorithms continue to reduce the amount of compute
required to train an AI model to a given level of capability, by approximately 50% every
18 months [118]. If this continues, then a stock of GPUs that is considered safe today,
could become dangerous in the future.




21 That is, a data center that supports AI hardware, such as graphics processing units (GPUs) or tensor

processing units (TPUs), that are generally used to train and run inference on advanced AI models. See
the Glossary of terms for a full definition.

22 In reality, AI hardware like data center GPUs undergo wear and tear and fail over time. But the useful

lifetime of a GPU is typically between 3-6 years (depending heavily on usage) [116], so an entity with a
stock of GPUs in a datacenter is effectively unrestricted in its training of AI models over that timeframe.


                                                                                                   44 of 284
This combination of challenges suggests that supply chain controls on AI training and
inference will to some extent have to be anticipatory. They will need to account not
only for what is possible today, but for what may be possible with the algorithms of the
next few years. Without a proactive approach, if AI systems begin to display dangerous
capabilities at a future point, the U.S. government may find itself with fewer options to
prevent such systems from proliferating.

See Annex G: Primer on AI and compute for more information on the impact of the
compute supply chain on AI risk, including key numerical thresholds and existing
compute concentrations.

0.5.4 Legal challenges

0.5.4.1 The current legal environment is inadequate to address the
most extreme risks from advanced AI

Advanced AI could introduce catastrophic risks that may not be adequately addressed
by the current U.S. legal environment. These risks have features that make them
difficult to mitigate without new legislative tools.

First, because AI models are software, they can proliferate almost instantly as open-
access or be stolen through cyberattacks. Once proliferated, certain advanced AI
models could irreversibly and dramatically increase the destructive footprint of threat
actors [1] (see 0.5.1.6). In the worst case, weaponization and loss of control of stolen or
open-access models could introduce catastrophic risks that are completely unintended
by the AI system’s developers. Moreover, some AI developers have an economic
incentive to publish increasingly powerful open-access models even as these
potentially become dangerously capable [93].23 One has even claimed it intends to
develop, and then open-source, AGI itself [40]. In the current legal environment, these
developers can release powerful AI models without incurring any liability if their models
are weaponized or augmented in dangerous ways.

Second, liability alone may be insufficient to address some of the most high-risk AI
development activities. This is because some frontier AI developers do not believe
catastrophic AI risk is plausible (see 0.4.4), while at the same time, some forms of
catastrophic AI risk may be so severe as to be unrecoverable (see 0.5.1.1). As a result,


23 This is because by publishing their models, these companies encourage open-source developers to

build on top of those models and frameworks, effectively augmenting their development capacity.


                                                                                            45 of 284
these developers are unlikely to be deterred by civil or even criminal liability that would
attach to an event that they do not believe will occur, and that, if it did, would impact
them in itself far more than would any realistic criminal sanction.

The current U.S. legal environment makes no explicit provision for such risks, and does
not establish clear criminal and civil liability conditions for the irresponsible release or
development of dangerous AI systems.




                                                                                    46 of 284
