Action plan to increase the safety and security of advanced AI

This is an action plan for the U.S. government to increase the safety and security of
advanced AI by countering catastrophic national security risks from AI
weaponization and loss of control. The United States is in a unique position to
mitigate these risks. It is home to all the current major frontier AI labs, and exerts
considerable influence on the global AI supply chain.

Given the pace of progress in AI and the proliferation of key inputs to AI development,
the U.S. government will need to move quickly and decisively to mitigate catastrophic
risks from advanced AI. It will need to establish interim AI safeguards urgently, and then
work to formalize those safeguards in national and international law. At the same time,
it should accelerate development of technical AI safety and security, including AI
alignment, by investing heavily in research capacity and capability in the United States
and around the world. Finally, the United States will need to increase its warning,
preparedness, and response capacity and capabilities for catastrophic AI risk scenarios.

We organize these actions along five lines of effort (LOEs). We recommend that all
LOEs begin execution immediately. Together, the LOEs proposed in this action plan
would allow the United States to immediately begin to reduce catastrophic risks
associated with frontier AI and AGI development while building the institutional
capacity and capabilities needed for successful risk management and governance.

Due to the complexity of catastrophic AI risks and the number of distinct vectors
through which they can arise, no single silver-bullet measure can assure safety and
security on its own. Rather, any viable action plan will consist of many mutually
reinforcing efforts that each address different threat vectors and challenges to varying
degrees, but which combine to form an effective safety and security regime. This is the
defense in depth principle that guides the structure of this action plan and the content
of its LOEs.

This action plan was developed over thirteen months, and informed by conversations
with over two hundred stakeholders from across the United States, United Kingdom,
and Canadian governments; major cloud providers; AI safety organizations; security
and computing experts; and formal and informal contacts at frontier AI labs. All of
these stakeholders — both individuals and institutions — have made unique and crucial
contributions to this document. We list and thank them in our Acknowledgments.




                                                                                 47 of 284
LOE1: Establish interim safeguards to stabilize
advanced AI development




The weaponization potential of current- and next-generation AI systems, [1] and the
risk of loss of control in future AI systems, create urgent and growing risks to national
security (Introduction, 0.5.1.1 and 0.5.1.2). The pace of development in AI is now so
rapid that an ordinary policymaking process could be overtaken by events by the time


                                                                                  48 of 284
the resulting policies take effect (Introduction, 0.5.2.1 and 0.5.3.1). Moreover, as
components of the AI supply chain continue to proliferate, these risks will become
increasingly challenging to contain (Introduction, 0.5.1.6 and 0.5.3.2). These factors
necessitate the implementation of near-term safeguards to protect U.S. national
security. At the same time, the benefits of innovation in AI mean that these safeguards
should be scoped to minimize economic or strategic harms (Introduction, 0.4.2).

This LOE outlines possible actions the Executive Branch could take to buy down
catastrophic AI risk in the near term (1-3 years), while setting the conditions for
successful long-term AI safeguards. These actions are:

   ● Creating an AI Observatory (AIO) to monitor developments in advanced AI and
     ensure that the U.S. government’s view of the field is up-to-date and reliable
     (see 1.2);
   ● Mandating an interim set of responsible AI development and adoption
     (RADA) safeguards for advanced AI systems and their developers (see 1.3);
   ● Creating an interagency AI Safety Task Force (ASTF) to coordinate
     implementation and oversight of RADA safeguards (see 1.4); and
   ● Putting in place a set of controls on the advanced AI supply chain calibrated to
     preserve U.S. government flexibility in the face of unpredictable risks (see 1.5).


1.1 National security threats addressed by this LOE

This LOE addresses two near-term national security threats from advanced AI. First, the
United States is exposed to weaponization of advanced AI systems through a variety of
vectors. Open-access AI models are at increasing risk of being weaponized by state
and non-state adversaries as their capabilities increase (Introduction, 0.5.1.6). U.S.-
developed, proprietary advanced AI systems face an ongoing threat of exfiltration and
subsequent weaponization (Introduction, 0.5.1.5). And other key components of the
advanced AI supply chain are proliferating through a variety of pathways, which could
support future development of AI systems by adversaries (Introduction, 0.5.3.2).

The second urgent national security threat is loss of control due to AGI alignment
failure [1]. In the near term, this threat stems from the incentives that U.S.-based
frontier AI companies face to develop and deploy powerful AI systems as rapidly as
possible with insufficient safeguards (Introduction, 0.5.1.2, 0.5.1.4 and 0.5.3.1). As
open-access AI capabilities continue to approach the frontier of proprietary systems
[119], there may also be potential loss-of-control risk from these models if they are
augmented with tools or software frameworks in unpredictable ways [120–123]
(Introduction, 0.5.1.6).


                                                                                 49 of 284
1.2 Establish an AI Observatory for advanced AI

The U.S. government urgently needs to establish situational awareness of the
landscape of advanced AI risks in order to better understand the timelines
(Introduction, 0.5.1.2), likelihoods (Introduction, 0.5.1.3), and severities (Introduction,
0.5.1.1) of emerging threats. It also needs to put in place basic early-warning and
preparedness capabilities. These basic capabilities can form a stop-gap while more
permanent Indications and Warnings (I&W) (LOE2, 2.3) and contingency measures
(LOE2, 2.4) are put in place.

Existing authorities may allow for the rapid establishment of these functions, such as
under the Department of Homeland Security (DHS).24 DHS could create an internal unit
for advanced AI monitoring and preparedness that we will refer to as an AI
Observatory (AIO). An AIO could serve as a U.S. government center for AI threat
evaluation, analysis, and information sharing. Its functions could include horizon-
scanning for emergent AI capabilities, and DHS-wide coordination to increase
homeland security preparedness to address weaponized AI and loss of control
scenarios. An AIO could also serve as a stopgap pending the formation of a dedicated
interagency task force (see 1.4) or statutory agency (LOE4, 4.1) to oversee catastrophic
AI risk mitigation. An AIO could also deliver reports on advanced AI to a National
Security Council-level (NSC-level) official to support awareness and coordination of
advanced AI risks and responses across departments and agencies (LOE2, 2.1).

Additionally, although DHS has established a Chief AI Officer to govern the
Department’s internal use of AI [126], no office or component is yet responsible to the
Secretary for the mission to counter AI threats. This lack of ownership may create a
responsibility gap in this mission area, and could pose a risk to homeland security.
State, Local, Tribal, and Territorial (SLTT) partners in particular count on DHS to share

24 For example, the Secretary of DHS may be able to declare advanced AI, defined according to a

computing or capability threshold, as a critical infrastructure sector under Presidential Policy Directive 21
(PPD-21) [124]. A related approach could be to extend the definition of the Information Technology [124]
critical infrastructure sector to encompass advanced AI development. A critical infrastructure designation
could benefit situational awareness by engaging the authorities of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA) under the Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2021
(CIRCIA) [125]. This statute requires operators of critical infrastructure to promptly report certain
cybersecurity incidents to the CISA. Many frontier AI labs broadly lack adequate cybersecurity
protections, leaving them vulnerable to exfiltration of advanced AI models by adversarial actors
(Introduction, 0.5.1.5). A critical infrastructure designation could offer the U.S. government some early
visibility into the frequency and severity of such incidents.


                                                                                                   50 of 284
critical threat information and close information gaps. In this context, we also
recommend that an AIO report directly to the Secretary of DHS if possible.

1.2.1 Functions

An AI Observatory could have three primary functions:

    1. Horizon scanning, which would involve closely monitoring progress in frontier AI
       by drawing from publicly available research, commercial datasets, private
       discussions with researchers, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
       (CISA) cyber incident reports, and independent evaluations of publicly
       accessible AI systems;

    2. Emergency preparedness, which would involve developing response plans for
       safety and security incidents and driving prioritization of DHS Science and
       Technology (S&T) AI safety and security investments; and

    3. Information-sharing and coordination both within DHS and with other
       departments and agencies, including any relevant interagency task forces (see
       1.4), the NSC, and SLTT partners.

An AIO’s horizon-scanning and information-sharing functions could directly support
advanced AI risk mitigation across the U.S. government. This includes the activities of
any future task forces (see 1.4) or statutory agencies (LOE4, 4.1) related to eventual
oversight and enforcement of RADA safeguards. Insights from oversight and
enforcement activities could in turn improve the quality of an AIO’s horizon-scanning
and analysis.25 These mutual benefits highlight the value of close collaboration
between an AIO and any U.S. government equities responsible for such activities, and
could argue for eventually centralizing all such functions under a single entity.

See Annex H: AIO activities for more details on the specific activities an AIO could
undertake.




25 For example, knowing the sizes and capabilities of frontier labs’ most advanced AI systems would

make it easier to understand which external projects merit tracking or present risks based on high-level
observables like compute resource availability.


                                                                                                51 of 284
     1.2.2 Staf ng

     Through its horizon-scanning function, an AIO would serve as a first-line warning
     system for homeland defense against AI and AI-derived threats. We therefore
     recommend that an AIO report directly to the Secretary through its Director. We also
     recommend that the Director of an AIO be co-equal with the DHS Chief AI Officer if
     possible. Whereas the Chief AI Officer should continue leading DHS efforts to
     responsibly use AI in support of homeland security missions, an AIO could focus on
     tracking and mitigating risks from domestic and external AI programs.

     To support its mission, an AIO could include representation from the Office of Strategy,
     Policy, and Plans (OSPP), the Science and Technology Directorate (S&T), the Countering
     Weapons of Mass Destruction (C-WMD) Office, CISA, the Federal Emergency
     Management Agency (FEMA), and other Components as appropriate. DHS
     Components could be required to allocate personnel and financial resources to
     support a DHS AIO.

     An AIO would need to closely monitor a rapidly advancing and highly technical field,
     and disseminate accurate, timely, and actionable insights across U.S. government
     stakeholders. A mission failure could, in the worst case, endanger national security
     (Introduction, 0.5.1.1). As a result, an AIO should be conceived as an elite homeland
     security unit. We therefore recommend that the AIO Director carefully manage a
     competitive process by which volunteers from across DHS and industry could be
     screened and selected to staff the AIO.

     For the same reason, the AIO Director should be a seasoned executive with a deep
     understanding of both U.S. government policy and AI technology. Technical proficiency
     in frontier AI would be a key requirement for this leadership position.

     1.2.3 Interagency coordination

     An AIO could coordinate with some of the following departments and agencies on
     information-sharing:26

         ● The Department of Energy (DOE), because of its technical expertise and
           ongoing responsibility for developing and implementing a plan for AI testing
           and evaluations and AI testbeds [127];

     26 In the event of a critical infrastructure designation under PPD-21, some of these could be designated

     as co-Sector-Specific Agencies (co-SSAs) for the advanced AI sector.


                                                                                                     52 of 284
fi
   ● The National Institutes of Standards and Technology (NIST) and its AI Safety
     Institute (U.S. AISI) because of its technical expertise and responsibility for
     developing and implementing guidance for AI evaluation standards [127];

   ● The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) because of its examination
     authorities over financial firms that may be conducting frontier AI development
     without public disclosure (see Annex D, D.4); and

   ● Any future task forces (see 1.4) or statutory agencies (LOE4, 4.1) dedicated to
     oversight and enforcement of RADA safeguards.


1.3 Establish responsible AI development and adoption
safeguards for U.S. private industry

While essential, horizon scanning is not sufficient on its own to safeguard against
potential near-term catastrophic risks from advanced AI (Introduction, 0.5.1.1, 0.5.1.2,
0.5.1.4, 0.5.1.5, 0.5.1.6 and 0.5.3.1). To address these, we strongly recommend putting
in place interim emergency regulatory measures pending Congressional action (see
LOE4).

These measures could take the form of enacting and overseeing a set of responsible
AI development and adoption (RADA) safeguards for any U.S. entities developing
advanced AI systems. Several AI developers have already published responsible
scaling policies [14,128,129] for internal adoption and external scrutiny. In private
conversations, others have acknowledged the need for government intervention in
developing and enforcing practices for safe and responsible AI scaling, given prevailing
incentives (Introduction, 0.5.3.1). However, the RADA safeguards framework we
propose (LOE4, 4.1.3) encompasses key safety and security principles not only for
advanced AI developers, but also for other key entities in the advanced AI supply
chain. This RADA framework also offers flexible guidance with respect to best practices
and operation of regulatory and oversight bodies (see 1.4; LOE4, 4.1).

In 1.4, we will recommend establishing an interim interagency task force to oversee
compliance with RADA safeguards until that function can be superseded by a
Congressionally mandated regulator (LOE4, 4.1). We will also recommend that this task
force be empowered to modify and update the RADA safeguards as conditions change
and new information becomes available.




                                                                                 53 of 284
1.3.1 Implementation mechanism and statutory authorities

RADA safeguards, as conceived above, would only apply to the limited set of AI
companies working at the frontier of current capabilities. Nonetheless, for the
Executive Branch to impose and enforce binding rules on domestic private sector
companies is an unusual action and may be without precedent. We believe this could
be done in one of two ways.

A first approach could be to include a framework for RADA safeguards as part of a
National Security Memorandum (NSM) attached to an existing Executive Order [127]. A
second approach could be to enact a RADA safeguards framework and establish an
oversight task force in a new Executive Order. In either case, the President may be able
to leverage authorities from some of the following statutes:

   ● The Communications Act of 1934, 47 USC 606 [130];

   ● The Defense Production Act of 1950, 50 USC 4502 [131];

   ● The Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 USC 2162 [132]; and/or

   ● The Invention Secrecy Act of 1951, 35 USC 181 [133].

In the event that the Executive Branch cannot enforce RADA safeguards, there may be
some limited value in negotiating detailed voluntary commitments with selected U.S.
frontier AI labs [134]. While voluntary measures would leave substantial safety and
security gaps relative to mandatory practices, they may be able to cover some portion
of the risk surface pending a Congressional solution.

In Annex I: Voluntary Charter for responsible AI, we sketch out a set of commitments
that we believe could form the basis for a voluntary agreement between the U.S.
government and major frontier labs in the near term (see also 1.4.1.1).

1.3.2 RADA safeguards principles

For an example of a complete RADA safeguards framework, including sample
calculations of thresholds for covered entities, see LOE4, 4.1.3.

In order to balance innovation and national security considerations (Introduction, 0.4.2
and 0.5.1.1), RADA safeguards should be stratified according to clearly demarcated
tiers of AI model capabilities, with escalating safety and security practices mandated for


                                                                                 54 of 284
each tier. Lower tiers should minimize regulatory burdens to the fullest extent possible.
Total training compute could initially be used as a proxy for AI capabilities in
determining the thresholds for each tier, but other normalized capability measures may
also be viable (see LOE4, 4.1.3.4 and Annex J: Effective compute). The thresholds for
each tier should be grounded in concrete national security considerations, such as the
lead times needed by contingency planners to identify and respond to various threats
scenarios (LOE2, 2.3 and 2.4), and the amount of time it would take an adversary to
develop AI capabilities that could trigger those threat scenarios (LOE4, 4.1.3).

To assure adequate security coverage, RADA safeguards should be followed not only
by the AI model developers themselves, but also by other entities in the local supply
chain such as AI hardware designers (LOE4, 4.1.3.1), data center infrastructure
providers (LOE4, 4.1.3.2), and AI hardware owners (LOE4, 4.1.3.3).

For developers of AI systems assessed as high-risk, RADA safeguards should include
comprehensive AI evaluations for those systems as one among several factors in
approving further AI scaling (LOE3, 3.2.2). Other factors should include outcomes of
automated benchmarks, red teaming, and other safety and security reviews performed
during the pre-training, training, pre-deployment, and deployment stages of the AI
development lifecycle (LOE4, 4.1.3.4.3). The ultimate aim of these RADA safeguards is
to drive the development and validation of robust scientific theories predicting the
capabilities and propensities of current and future frontier AI systems, to support
responsible scaling once that understanding is achieved.

Finally, RADA safeguards should support the flexible adjustment of tiering thresholds in
response to new information. For example, if AI evaluations consistently suggest that
prevailing capability levels are safe, RADA compute thresholds could be loosened
under close monitoring to support further scaling. On the other hand, if algorithmic
improvements make it possible to develop powerful AI capabilities with less compute
(Annex G, G.3), RADA compute thresholds could be adjusted downward in response.

Because of the rapid pace of progress in AI, compute and capability thresholds for
RADA tiers should be frequently reviewed and updated in consultation with domain
experts. Inaction or slow action in this area could stifle U.S. innovation on the one
hand, or open critical national security gaps on the other.




                                                                                 55 of 284
1.4 Establish an AI Safety Task Force for RADA oversight

In parallel with a RADA framework, we recommend that the President establish an AI
Safety Task Force (ASTF) and direct departments and agencies to resource it fully,
working with the Congress for supplemental funding if required. The ASTF’s primary
mission would be to lead U.S. government efforts to facilitate responsible AI
development and adoption by mitigating catastrophic national security threats
from weaponization and loss of control. It would accomplish this mission by
overseeing compliance with RADA safeguards (see 1.3) on an interim basis, and
support institutional capacity-building in AI risk management, until a permanent
regulatory agency for advanced AI can be established by the Congress (LOE4, 4.1). To
support this mission, the President could empower the ASTF to implement, update,
enforce a set of RADA safeguards for relevant domestic stakeholders in advanced AI.

We recommend that the ASTF be led by a Presidentially-appointed, Senate-confirmed
executive, staffed by interagency personnel, and augmented by technical expertise
from the private sector. Private sector expertise should be carefully vetted for
organizational conflicts of interest related to frontier labs, tech companies, and other
institutional and non-profit investors, prioritizing technical acumen.

We recommend that the ASTF report to an official at the NSC level in the Executive
Branch, to ensure a direct channel for escalation of AI-related emergencies (see LOE2,
2.1). The ASTF could be sited either at DOE or DHS. Both Departments have
complementary areas of expertise with respect to advanced AI: DOE has significant in-
house technical expertise, while DHS has specialists in CBRN risk assessment.27

As part of its mandate of RADA oversight, the ASTF may need to supervise AI
evaluations related to CBRN and WMD-enabled capabilities. This may require the ASTF
to process classified information. However, to accelerate recruitment of personnel with
key technical expertise (and who may not initially be cleared), the ASTF could begin by
consuming only unclassified information with the goal of eventually ingesting classified
information. Because DHS and NIST have already been tasked with developing policies



27 DHS may also house an AIO (see 1.2), which could simplify collaboration between that unit’s horizon-

scanning function and the ASTF’s oversight function if the ASTF were sited at DHS. The functions of an
AIO could also be absorbed directly into the ASTF.


                                                                                               56 of 284
for CBRN AI evaluations [127], the ASTF could be focused on loss of control risk in its
early phase to enable its work to begin in the unclassified domain.

1.4.1 Mission

The ASTF’s mission would be to facilitate responsible AI development and adoption
by mitigating catastrophic national security threats from weaponization and loss of
control. This mission would include one initial Priority Objective and two Sustainment
Components.

The ASTF’s Priority Objective would be to finalize a set of RADA safeguards and secure
agreement on those terms from key frontier AI labs and other stakeholders. Once the
ASTF has achieved its Priority Objective, its sustainment activities would fall into two
categories:28

    ● Overseeing industry compliance with RADA safeguards, and operating the
      necessary supporting infrastructure; and

    ● Developing recommendations for a future legal regime and regulatory agency in
      support of LOE4.

The ASTF should also expect some portion of its initial set of RADA safeguards to be
inadequate or unworkable for reasons that it will discover during negotiation and
implementation. The ASTF may need to adapt its RADA safeguards accordingly, and
should capture learnings from its experiences to inform formal regulation.

For a detailed list of activities the ASTF could undertake in support of its mission,
including one possible organizational structure for the task force, see Annex K: ASTF
activities and task-organization.

1.4.1.1 Priority Objective: Finalize and secure agreement on RADA
safeguards

We recommend the ASTF’s top priority be to finalize a set of interim RADA safeguards
and secure initial commitments from key frontier AI labs and their cloud providers on
their implementation.


28 In the event that the ASTF absorbs the functions of an AIO (see 1.2), it could also take over horizon

scanning and monitoring of external AI programs as a third Sustainment Component.


                                                                                                 57 of 284
If the President has established an enforceable set of RADA safeguards (“Plan A”),
whether via NSM or Executive Order (see 1.3.1), the Director of the ASTF could be
empowered to reach an agreement with frontier AI labs ensuring that further frontier AI
development will adhere to those safeguards. The ASTF could adjust the RADA
safeguards based on discussion with the frontier labs or on other practical
considerations. But we recommend the safeguards be as close as possible to what
could be enforced by a Congressionally mandated regulator (LOE4, 4.1). This would
allow the ASTF’s experience to better inform the implementation of a full regulatory
regime by identifying early challenges and blind spots, consistent with its mission (see
1.4.1.3).

Although we assess that enforceable RADA safeguards are urgently needed, if they
cannot be established (“Plan B”), we recommend that the President instead empower
the ASTF to negotiate an interim, voluntary frontier AI safeguards regime with major
frontier AI labs [135] and additional entities at the ASTF’s discretion. Annex I: Voluntary
Charter for responsible AI provides a proposal for more limited commitments that
could be negotiated on a voluntary basis.29 These negotiations could culminate in the
signing, by frontier labs and cloud providers, of a voluntary Charter outlining a set of AI
safety and security commitments. Frontier labs may also be encouraged to sign onto a
voluntary Charter in order to participate in negotiating the Charter terms and
influencing its implementation, since these could inform the details of future laws and
regulations.




29 These more limited commitments would significantly increase public safety and national security

exposure to potential catastrophic AI risks relative to the RADA safeguards outlined in LOE4, 4.1.3. They
would also limit the extent to which the ASTF’s work can inform the implementation of laws and
regulations under LOE4. For example, proposed voluntary commitments may not include guarantees to
avoid training models above potentially dangerous thresholds of compute, or promises to avoid
deploying large uninterpretable models, without prior safety assessments. Both of these measures would
be critical to any meaningful attempt to address catastrophic risk from AI, under the security and safety
conditions that currently exist at frontier labs.


                                                                                               58 of 284
In order to best position the ASTF for success in these negotiations, the President
could also:30

   ● Publicly call on U.S. frontier AI labs to pause development of models trained
     with more than 10^26 OP of total compute;

   ● Publicly call on U.S. AI developers to pause any plans to release open-access
     models trained with more than 10^25 OP of total compute; and

   ● Publicly call on U.S. cloud providers to pause their provision of cloud services for
     training runs aimed at developing open-access AI models with more than 10^25
     OP of compute.




30 As with all numerical thresholds in this document, these numbers could change quickly and should be

reviewed by subject-matter experts with up-to-date information on the technical landscape in advanced
AI.


                                                                                             59 of 284
Figure 5. Safeguards to introduce to frontier AI developers, AI hardware owners, and data
center infrastructure providers in the event that RADA safeguards can (Plan A) and cannot (Plan
B) be mandated.




                                                                                       60 of 284
1.4.1.2 Sustainment Component: Oversee compliance with RADA
safeguards

Once initial commitments are secured, the ASTF could build processes to oversee
compliance with RADA safeguards, and operate the necessary supporting
infrastructure.

This Sustainment Component of the ASTF’s mission should be understood to serve as a
stopgap pending legislation (see LOE4), and as a mechanism by which problems and
challenges that would face future regulators can be identified and addressed as early
as possible. The ASTF could be absorbed into a domestic regulatory agency (LOE4,
4.1) if and when one is established.31

For a list of specific activities the ASTF could undertake in support of this Sustainment
Component of its mission, see Annex K, K.1.

1.4.1.3 Sustainment Component: Develop recommendations for future
regulations

The ASTF’s second goal would be to develop recommendations for a future legal
regime and regulatory agency (see LOE4).

We anticipate that the ASTF may have to revise the RADA safeguards based on its
experience overseeing stakeholder compliance with its terms [138]. For a future AI
regulatory agency to have the best chance of success, the teams that develop
recommendations for that agency’s operating model should work closely with the
teams that regularly encounter the successes and failures of AI oversight in the real
world. The ASTF’s oversight component (see 1.4.1.2) would create valuable experience
that the task force could apply to this mission component. The revisions the ASTF
implements could then directly inform the development and enforcement of future
regulations under LOE4.

For a list of specific activities the ASTF could undertake in support of this Sustainment
Component of its mission, see Annex K, K.2.




31 This would be similar to, e.g., the Atomic Energy Commission’s succession by the Nuclear Regulatory

Commission (NRC) under the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (42 USC § 5801) [136,137].


                                                                                              61 of 284
1.4.2 Resources and staf ng

The ASTF could initially consist of a small task force of 20-25 individuals. The U.K.
Frontier AI Taskforce has shown that a task force with this size and mandate can be
established quickly, and then immediately begin to make visible progress on its key
objectives [139].

The ASTF’s unique mission (see 1.4.1) necessitates the capability both to interpret and
update a RADA framework, and to oversee its implementation in practice. This means
the task force will need to be staffed by individuals who have experience in both
policies and programs.32 Initially this could mean recruiting subject-matter experts from
across relevant departments and agencies, to be augmented with private-sector
contractors over time.

The ASTF’s mission would also require it to respond rapidly to real-time developments
in AI which may have complicated origins and implications. To be set up for success in
this mission, the ASTF would need to recruit the world’s top technical experts in
advanced AI safety and security. It would also need to recruit high-quality personnel,
from its inception, to ensure a culture of speed and effectiveness is established and
reinforced from an early stage.

This combination of requirements may necessitate compensation waivers for the task
force [127].33 The ASTF could also benefit from additional approaches to ensuring a
high quality standard. For example, the first set of ASTF employees could be assigned
at six-month intervals, and key personnel decisions could be approved at the level of
the Executive Branch.

Additionally, many of the world’s top experts in AI safety and security are motivated by
a desire for positive impact. But these individuals, while experts in their respective
fields, may not be experienced at identifying positions in a government organization in
which they could contribute. As a result, we believe the ASTF could benefit from high-
level public messaging that would position it as the central hub for forward-thinking
regulation in advanced AI safety and security across the U.S. government. The U.K.’s

32 In the event a set of enforceable RADA safeguards are not established, the ASTF will need the

capability to negotiate a voluntary Charter with frontier AI labs, then oversee compliance with that
Charter. This mission would still require a combination of policies and programs experience to execute
successfully.

33 For reference, based on interviews conducted over the course of this assessment, junior AI alignment

researchers at frontier labs have total compensation packages totalling $500,000 per year or more.


                                                                                               62 of 284
                      fi
Frontier AI Taskforce has shown the effectiveness of this centralized approach in
attracting and retaining some of the world’s top AI talent [140], something that all
governments have otherwise found challenging.

Finally, ASTF staff may be exposed to stakeholders’ IP as part of the task force’s
oversight activities. The ASTF should therefore consider implementing revolving door
guarantees that would forbid task force employees who are exposed to such IP from
working, consulting for, or being contracted by organizations that are or may be
developing advanced AI systems for some period of time (e.g., 5 years) after leaving
the ASTF.

See Annex K, K.3 for one approach to organizing the ASTF into workstreams that
would support execution of its mission’s two Sustainment Components (see 1.4.1.2 and
1.4.1.3).

1.4.3 Financial requirements and budget

The ASTF would require a budget sufficient to cover temporary duty (TDY) for
government staff, contractor salaries, equipment, and facilities. This could include
contracting advanced AI researchers to support the ASTF’s mission. Given that the
ASTF would also need to maintain high security standards, as well as costly AI testing,
evaluation, and development infrastructure, it would have to be well-resourced in order
to be positioned for success.

By default, funding for the ASTF would be drawn from the budget of its parent
department, whether DOE or DHS. This may be inadequate depending on the lifetime
of the task force. We therefore recommend that the President ask for supplemental
funding from the Congress for the ASTF. The Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
could make a request for supplemental funding from Congress that is limited in scope.
Alternatively, the President could also direct OMB to reallocate funds from the existing
budget.

1.4.4 Authorities

Authorities could be delegated to the ASTF in one of two ways. First, the ASTF could
be staffed by interagency representatives that would bring with them the authorities of
their respective departments and agencies via memoranda of understanding (MOUs).
And second, the President could delegate authorities directly to the ASTF. Either
approach would let the ASTF leverage the authorities of selected other agencies in real
time, a critical requirement given the urgency of the task force’s mandate.


                                                                                  63 of 284
But certain useful authorities could only be granted by the Congress. For example, the
fast timescale of AI progress may make it challenging for the ASTF to operate on an
annual budget cycle (Introduction, 0.5.2.1). To cover this gap, the ASTF could benefit
from no-year funding authority to support its operations, which would need to be
granted as part of a supplemental funding request. Additionally, decisionmakers may
want to provide additional flexibility for unknown requirements by granting the ASTF
"notwithstanding authority." This would give the ASTF flexibility to do its work when
the national security imperative overrides the reasons for other legal restrictions.

In any case, some of the authorities granted to the ASTF would depend on whether the
President has mandated an enforceable set of RADA safeguards (see 1.3).

   ● If RADA safeguards have been mandated, the ASTF could oversee an
     implementation of those safeguards similar to that described in LOE4, 4.1.3 and
     could therefore be granted some of the following authorities:

          ○ Advise the President and Congress on AI safety and security and
            potential catastrophic AI risk, or report directly to an NSC-level official if
            one has been appointed (LOE2, 2.1);
          ○ Enter into commercial and academic partnerships and contracts;
          ○ Coordinate with interagency stakeholders and international partners such
            as the U.K. Frontier AI Taskforce (through the Department of State) in
            support of frontier AI and AGI safeguards;
          ○ Engage on behalf of the United States with frontier AI labs, their cloud
            providers, and other stakeholders to finalize a set of RADA safeguards
            under which entities can be licensed to pursue certain forms of frontier AI
            research and development;
          ○ Inspect and audit frontier AI labs and projects;
          ○ Compel testimony and production of documents;
          ○ License and approve AI training runs above certain compute and
            capability thresholds (LOE4, 4.1.3.4);
          ○ License data center infrastructure providers whose facilities fall above a
            threshold of power consumption (LOE4, 4.1.3.2);
          ○ License AI hardware owners whose aggregate compute capacity exceeds
            a given threshold (LOE4, 4.1.3.3);




                                                                                    64 of 284
          ○ Determine publication control standards for frontier AI- and AGI-relevant
            information (e.g., LOE4, 4.1.4); and
          ○ Pause frontier AI training runs on an emergency basis.

   ● If RADA safeguards have not been mandated, the ASTF could instead negotiate
     with frontier AI labs and major cloud providers to obtain specific voluntary
     commitments for safe and secure AI development, and could therefore be
     granted some of the following authorities:

          ○ Advise the President and Congress on AI safety and security and
            potential catastrophic AI risk, or report directly to an NSC-level official if
            one has been appointed (LOE2, 2.1);
          ○ Enter into commercial and academic partnerships and contracts;
          ○ Coordinate with interagency stakeholders and international partners such
            as the U.K. Frontier AI Taskforce (through the Department of State) in
            support of frontier AI and AGI safeguards;
          ○ Negotiate a Charter of commitments to voluntary AI safeguards on behalf
            of the United States. (See Annex I: Voluntary Charter for responsible AI.)

1.4.5 Location

We recommend that the ASTF be headquartered in the National Capital Region (NCR)
with a small footprint in the San Francisco Bay Area in close proximity to frontier AI
labs, AI safety research groups, and relevant tech companies. This would follow the
practice of other federal regulators such as the SEC, which maintains regional offices in
major financial centers [141] in addition to federal headquarters in the NCR.


1.5 Securing the advanced AI supply chain

The global supply chain for advanced AI includes:

   ● The AI models themselves;

   ● The data centers and cloud computing platforms that train those AI models;

   ● The AI hardware (GPUs, TPUs) that powers those data centers;




                                                                                    65 of 284
   ● The semiconductor foundries that manufacture that AI hardware, along with their
     upstream tooling and inputs; and

   ● The research organizations and other human capital required to train the most
     advanced AI systems.

The United States is well positioned to enact effective counterproliferation measures
across key nodes in this supply chain. Development of this capacity is critical for
national security, especially considering the significant capabilities and risks associated
with current and near-future AI systems [4].

However, the advanced AI supply chain poses challenges that necessitate anticipatory
rather than reactive action. Under present conditions, elements of this supply chain will
continue to proliferate while algorithmic improvements will likely lower the cost of
training powerful models (Introduction, 0.5.1.6 and 0.5.3.2).

In light of these considerations, we recommend securing key nodes in the advanced AI
supply chain proactively. Initially this could include measures aimed at securing the
immediate inputs to advanced AI model development, and explore approaches aimed
at minimizing the risk posed by the proliferation of the AI models themselves. At the
same time, the U.S. government should consider more robust long-term controls on AI
hardware exports and tooling across all levels of this supply chain, and seek
recommendations for controls in areas such as advanced AI research collaborations
between U.S. and foreign entities.

It is also important for these measures to account for the national security implications
associated with adversarial access to dual-use items. This nuance is well-known by
specialists in the dual-use export control field but advanced AI will present unique
challenges. For example, absent additional measures, existing regulations may still
permit foreign actors to access AI hardware, AI cloud services for training or inference,
and API usage of advanced AI systems. The U.S. government could leverage best
practices from existing authorities such as the Export Administration Regulations (EAR)
[142] to consider how best to control exports of several of the relevant components.




                                                                                   66 of 284
1.5.1 AI model weights

Beyond a certain threshold of capability, an advanced AI model could be a dual-use
technology. The exact threshold for this is challenging to define precisely and remains
the subject of ongoing research.34 In particular, it is currently unclear whether today’s
most advanced AI models have meaningful dual-use capabilities, though there are
indications that this threshold could be crossed soon [91,143]. As software, AI model
weights are also extremely easy to disseminate and pose substantial proliferation risks.
Open-access AI models, in particular, carry risks of augmentation and latent capabilities
(Introduction, 0.5.1.6).

In light of these risks, we recommend that the U.S. government urgently explore
approaches to restrict the open-access release or sale of advanced AI models above
key thresholds of capability or total training compute. These approaches may be able
to leverage existing authorities, supported by ongoing efforts to assess dual-use
capabilities [144,145]. However the irreversibility of open-access release, and the
possibility of subsequent dangerous capability augmentation, means that dual-use
assessments may not provide an adequate measure of the risk surfaces of AI systems
under open-access release.

1.5.2 Cloud computing

The United States currently holds a significant advantage in cloud computing
technology. If leveraged appropriately, the U.S. government could harness its domestic
industry capabilities in a manner that services a number of strategic objectives.

Even with sound controls for AI model weight dissemination (see 1.5.1) and AI
hardware exports (see 1.5.3), U.S. adversaries could still access significant compute for
AI training runs via U.S.-based cloud service providers. This is a source of meaningful
risk, particularly as larger amounts of compute become increasingly available through
these services (see Annex D, D.3). The Department of Commerce has been directed to
draft regulations regarding the use of U.S.-based AI cloud providers by foreign users to
train AI models, with an emphasis on risks from AI-enabled cyber warfare [127]. In this




34 In particular, DOE, DHS, and NIST have been tasked to evaluate advanced AI models’ weaponization

potential in the CBRN domains [127].


                                                                                           67 of 284
section we will discuss a few considerations that we believe are relevant to cloud
computing regulations now and in the future.35

At the moment, the entities that develop the most capable open-access AI models are
primarily training them on infrastructure owned by AI cloud providers that are
headquartered in the United States and allied jurisdictions. As a result, any regulatory
framework that would apply to proprietary AI models would largely apply to open-
access AI models. However, an AI model could be required to meet a higher threshold
of safety (e.g., have a lower level of capability) to qualify for release under open access
than for proprietary development. In particular, the AI cloud provider would have to
certify that no model trained using its infrastructure surpassed a given open-access
capability threshold.

We believe the long-term goal of an AI cloud controls regime should be to extend a
set of RADA safeguards, such as those proposed in LOE4, 4.1.3 to foreign AI
model developers who train their models using U.S. cloud providers. This ideal
would require very fine grained monitoring of AI cloud training runs while still
preserving privacy, and may be infeasible for some time. In the nearer term, the
Department of Commerce could follow either of two licensing approaches to address
this risk:36

    1. Restrict foreign entities’ access to U.S. AI cloud compute services. This
       mitigates some short-term risk, but also creates economic pressure for foreign
       states to build their own AI cloud clusters, potentially eroding U.S. strategic
       control over the AI supply chain in the long term.37 Even a brief period of broad
       restrictions could create a strategic impetus for adversaries to indigenize AI
       cloud services [146].

    2. Retain most foreign entities’ ability to access U.S. AI cloud compute services, but
       implement narrow controls for cases in which an entity requests large
       amounts of compute capacity. This would involve end-user controls, combined


35 Direction was for Commerce to prepare draft regulations within 90 days of October 30, 2023, so by

January 28, 2024. Since this date falls after the final content review date of this assessment, we are
unable to refer to the text of these draft regulations here.

36 Thanks to Tim Fist at the Center for a New American Security (CNAS) for some of the suggestions in

this section.

37 This concern may be reduced in the medium term if export controls on AI hardware (see 1.5.3) are

extended to a broader set of states.


                                                                                                   68 of 284
        with strong know-your-customer (KYC) procedures. At a minimum, KYC could
        confirm that an AI cloud customer is not on the Entity List, Military User End List,
        or other similar lists [147]. It could also block customer access above key
        thresholds of total training compute (see, for example, the approval threshold
        that defines Tier 3 AI models in the RADA framework of LOE4, 4.1.3). Over time,
        these practices could also be expanded to cloud providers in key allied
        jurisdictions.

1.5.3 AI hardware

Any entity with enough AI hardware (e.g., GPUs), supporting infrastructure, and talent
can train advanced AI models. Today’s AI hardware is generally not traceable or
auditable, and includes limited remote monitoring functionality. AI hardware that is
modified to enable verification and monitoring will be integral to any
counterproliferation plan. It will take time to ensure this hardware is widely
disseminated but early efforts suggest it may be technologically feasible [148]. As in
the case of AI cloud computing (see 1.5.2), nearer-term controls will need to be more
fine-grained.

As of October 17, 2023, the Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security
(BIS) has expanded U.S. export controls related to advanced AI-enabled chips to China.
[149–151].

In the near term, the BIS could consider the following factors in further refining its AI
hardware export controls:

    ● As of January 2024, updated BIS controls restrict the export of AI chips to China
      if they exceed either (1) a total processing performance (TPP) of 4800 bits x
      TOPS38, or (2) a performance density threshold of 5.92 bits x TOPS per square
      millimeter of die area39 [152,153]. These updates close several previous gaps.
      But we assess that security could be further improved by:




38 TOPS = trillions of operations per second. So this threshold is equivalent to 4.8 x 10^15 bits x OPS.

See the Glossary of terms for more information.

39 Above this performance density threshold, chip exports are banned. Below this threshold, but above

3.2 bits x TOPS per square millimeter, a chip requires a license to export to China.


                                                                                                 69 of 284
            ○ Updating condition (1) to apply to any AI chip whose maximum compute
              capacity, across all numerical representations, is above 800 TOPS, with
              sparsity; and also
            ○ Updating condition (2) to apply to any AI chip whose maximum compute
              capacity, across all numerical representations, is above 1 TOPS per square
              millimeter of die area. This would amount to lowering the compute
              capacity ceiling for export by 33% while preserving the original intent of
              the performance density threshold condition.40

        We assess that these updates would significantly impact foreign actors’ ability to
        train both current-generation (GPT-4) and next-generation (GPT-5) frontier AI
        models.41

    ● As AI algorithms improve, the potential risk of weaponization and loss of control
      from a given concentration of AI hardware increases over time. As a first step to
      de-risking this effect, the BIS could consider using AI benchmarks such as
      Massive Multitask Language Understanding (MMLU) [154] to estimate proxies for
      AI capabilities per OP using present-day algorithms. It could then update its
      export control thresholds periodically as algorithms improve. Ultimately, though,
      export control thresholds at any given time will need to account for the
      possibility of unknown future algorithmic improvements. The same concentration
      of AI hardware that is safe given today’s AI training algorithms, could pose risks
      of weaponization or loss of control if it is used to implement future training
      techniques (Introduction, 0.5.3.2).




40 As an example, the NVIDIA A100 GPU has an FP16 (i.e., 16-bit width) tensor core performance of 312

TOPS (or teraFLOPS) without sparsity, and 624 TOPS (or teraFLOPS) with sparsity. Current export
controls work by multiplying the 16-bit width by the 312 TOPS no-sparsity performance, yielding 4992
TOPS x bits for this chip and therefore very close to the existing export control threshold of 4800 TOPS x
bits. Our recommendation would be to instead look for the maximum with-sparsity compute capacity of
this chip, which is 1248 TOPS under the INT8 (i.e., 8-bit width) tensor core representation, and therefore
clearly exceeds our proposed threshold of 800 TOPS.

41 We are recommending a TOPS-based (i.e., compute capacity) threshold rather than (as with current

controls) a threshold based on the product of TOPS multiplied by bit width. The reason is that a (TOPS x
bit width) threshold risks incentivizing the development of AI chips optimized for shorter bit
representations and higher compute capacities, which is already an industry trend that has been
accelerating advanced AI capabilities development. A purely TOPS-based threshold, on the other hand,
targets compute capacity directly. Thanks to Tim Fist at CNAS for this observation.


                                                                                                70 of 284
   ● The BIS could also coordinate with future task forces (see 1.4), research centers
     (LOE3, 3.1.2.2) and regulatory agencies (LOE4, 4.1) to align export controls for
     AI hardware with domestic regulations and up-to-date assessments of AI
     capabilities and safety research.

   ● As research into remote monitoring systems for AI hardware progresses, the BIS
     could consider tying export licenses to the implementation of on-chip
     monitoring [148]. For example, enabling companies to adopt on-chip
     monitoring for all exports in order to restore export licenses. This could support
     legitimate uses of advanced AI hardware, while preserving the ability to detect
     and remotely block high-risk activity. In the near-term, in order to incentivize
     progress in remote monitoring and related technologies, BIS could consider
     committing to AI hardware designers that they will maintain certain levels of
     access to export markets if they implement on-chip security features with certain
     properties [148].

   ● Given the risk that adversarial countries could acquire advanced chips through
     illegitimate means, including through third countries [155,156], the BIS could
     also consider temporarily blocking exports of certain AI hardware to all foreign
     or non-allied jurisdictions [157].

To support efforts tied to on-chip remote monitoring and related technologies, the
Departments of Commerce and DHS could consider establishing export licensing red
teaming programs. These programs could focus on testing and uncovering
vulnerabilities in new or proposed on-chip governance technologies designed to grant
companies the ability to export AI hardware to specific geographies [148]. These
programs could also be undertaken in collaboration with federally funded research
centers (LOE3, 3.1).

1.5.4 Research collaborations

U.S. and foreign researchers have frequently collaborated on AI research activities. This
has led to the co-development of noteworthy models, such EfficientZero (Tsinghua
University and UC Berkeley collaboration) [158] and NÜWA (Peking University and
Microsoft Research Asia collaboration) [159], and has contributed to AI talent
development abroad.

The U.S. government should investigate the the cost-benefit tradeoffs of such
collaborations in the context of the advanced AI risk landscape.



                                                                                 71 of 284
However, excessive restrictions could prevent the diffusion of U.S. technical knowledge
on advanced AI risk to the international research community. For example, the recent
outreach by Western AI researchers to the Chinese research community about AI risk
has been a critical step to establishing common ground and a shared understanding of
the topic. Overly restrictive controls could deter such outreach in the future, to the
detriment of U.S. and global security. Additionally, because AI risk awareness is still
relatively nascent globally, we expect that research collaborations focused on
understanding and mitigating key AI risks could become positive factors in long-term
safety (LOE5, 5.2.1.2).

One straightforward option could be to educate U.S. academics on the national
security risks of certain kinds of knowledge transfer to support their ability to judge
which research collaborations are appropriate.

1.5.5 Education of foreign nationals

Currently, foreign AI expertise draws significantly from both collaboration with U.S.
academic labs, and from foreign nationals educated at U.S. universities. We
recommend the U.S. government explore approaches to encourage foreign nationals
studying AI at U.S. universities — particularly at the graduate level — to remain in the
United States upon completion of their studies. Lowering immigration barriers for such
individuals is likely to increase U.S. competitiveness in AI while supporting economic
growth and job creation.

The Department of State has already been directed to establish a program to attract
top AI talent to the United States [127]. DHS has also been directed to clarify and
modernize immigration pathways for AI researchers, startup founders, and others
working in the field. We believe these are constructive steps.

Educating U.S. academics on national security risk and designating categories of AI
research projects as suitable for work by foreign graduate and undergraduate students
could also support limiting knowledge transfer, as in the case of research collaborations
(see 1.5.4).




                                                                                   72 of 284
