LOE3: Increase national investment in technical AI
safety research and standards development




The acceleration of investment in AI capabilities is outpacing the development of
proportionate technical safeguards against advanced AI and AGI risks [5] (Introduction,
0.5.1.2 and 0.5.1.3). If this continues, frontier AI labs may find themselves unable to
meet the safety and security challenges posed by their own systems (Introduction,
0.5.1.4). Unless strong technical safeguards are designed, standardized, and broadly
applied, continued development and adoption of frontier AI systems could create
significant risks (Introduction, 0.5.1.1).

This LOE outlines specific actions the U.S. government could take to strengthen
domestic technical capacity in advanced AI safety and security, AGI alignment, and
other technical AI safeguards. These actions include:

   ● Directly funding advanced AI safety and security research including AGI-
     scalable alignment research (see 3.1); and

   ● Developing, regularly reviewing, and promulgating safety and security
     standards for responsible AI development and adoption (see 3.2).




                                                                               89 of 284
These solutions would grow the pool of competent AI and AGI safety and security
researchers, encourage organizations to invest in AI safety and security, and increase
overall understanding of AGI alignment techniques.


3.1 Federally funded research in AI safety and security and
AGI-scalable alignment

Since 2021, annual private spending on AI capabilities has exceeded $100B,
dramatically outstripping funding for AI safety and security [184]. AI capabilities
research publications outnumber safety publications by a fifty-to-one margin [184]. Yet
according to experts, in order for the level of investment in AGI-scalable safety
research to approach the level needed to address catastrophic AI risk, it would need to
reach at least 50% of total research spend [185]. The current funding gap exists
because, while AI safety and security is a common good, AI capabilities produce
benefits that are easier to privatize. As a result, private industry has a strong incentive
to invest in capabilities at the expense of research aimed at catastrophic AI risk
reduction (Introduction, 0.5.1.4, 0.5.1.5, and 0.5.3.1).

Aside from private industry and academic labs [186,187], there is also an emerging
ecosystem of independent AI safety researchers, nonprofit and for-profit AGI alignment
labs [188–190], and advanced AI auditing firms [94,166,191]. However most of the
organizations in this ecosystem currently rely on a small set of donors for funding,
which could limit the diversity of strategies to AGI alignment reflected in the output of
the AI safety research community.48 Because AGI alignment is still a nascent field that
benefits disproportionately from a breadth of research approaches, this concentration
of funding sources could create limitations to progress.

The U.S. government is uniquely positioned to close the funding gap between AI
capabilities and AI safety and security, accelerate progress on core problems, and
diversify the set of funding sources and research programs aimed at solving AGI
alignment.49 See Annex L: AI safety and security research topics for a list of research
areas that could be supported by U.S. federal funding.




48 See Annex E: Funding in AI safety for more information.


49 See Annex B: The full challenge of AGI alignment for details.



                                                                                   90 of 284
3.1.1 Levels of AI safety and security research

In addition to its capacity for funding critical basic research, the U.S. government can
also ensure that those research efforts adhere to necessary security practices and that
they have the required levels of access to key technologies, resources, and talent. This
is critical in the context of AI safety and security research that may require interacting
closely with potentially dangerous frontier AI models.

Not all such research will require the deepest levels of access. We recommend
establishing tiers of AI safety and security research that reflect the escalating risk and
responsibility associated with granting researchers broader access to increasingly
capable models and evaluation capabilities. We provide a possible categorization
below along with examples.

3.1.1.1 Open-source and public research

Some types of AI safety and security research involve only low-risk activities and do not
require any special access to frontier AI models. All aspects of research at this level can
and should be publicly shared. Funding of open-source research could support
independent AI alignment and AI safety and security researchers and organizations. It
could also support the development of software tools and frameworks with important
safety and security applications, such as test harnesses, evaluation frameworks,
sandboxes, and interpretability tools. To maximize the diversity of research approaches,
we recommend that funding grants at this level impose minimal compliance overhead
on recipients.

Some examples of research at this level could include:

   ● Certain kinds of evaluations for advanced AI systems, including basic sandbox
     and testbed development;

   ● Certain kinds of AI interpretability research, including on sub-frontier AI models
     generally regarded as safe [192];

   ● Theoretical research aimed at investigating evidence for risks associated with
     power-seeking and associated tendencies [2,47];

   ● Research aimed at determining the extent to which existing alignment
     techniques could or could not scale to AGI-level systems [84]; and



                                                                                    91 of 284
   ● Basic research into on-device monitoring for AI chips [148].

The decision to classify AI safety research as open-source should take into account the
risk that the research could empower threat actors to weaponize AI more effectively,
subvert on-chip monitoring capabilities (e.g. LOE1, 1.5.3), or otherwise accelerate or
proliferate AGI development. But it should also account for the potential economic and
societal harms of withholding such research from the public (Introduction, 0.4.2). As a
result, publication decisions should be closely informed by input from academic
researchers, the AI safety and national security communities, and private sector
industry including the startup community.

Funding for open-source and public research could be directed towards the following
types of entities:

   ● Academic labs and independent researchers working on AI safety and security
     projects;

   ● Nonprofits conducting AI safety and security research;

   ● Researchers at National Labs and other centers of excellence within the U.S.
     government with the capacity to pursue AGI-scalable alignment research;

   ● For-profit AI safety research labs working on AGI-scalable alignment techniques.

3.1.1.2 Research that requires access to proprietary AI models

Certain essential types of AI safety and security research will require a high degree of
access to frontier labs’ proprietary AI models, or may otherwise involve moderate-risk
activities without being sensitive enough to necessitate a security clearance. Some of
the results of research at this level could still be published, but the extent of disclosure
should be informed by risk assessments and IP considerations.

The government can play a key role in supporting this research by offering direct
funding, mediating researcher access to developers’ AI models, and overseeing
researcher compliance with the necessary security practices. This could involve
certifying AI safety research groups or individual researchers to access frontier labs’
proprietary AI models. This approach could also be used to support AI evaluator
certification and access to frontier lab models by entities such as the ASTF (see LOE1,
1.4.1.2) or a permanent regulator (see LOE4, 4.1.2.1).



                                                                                    92 of 284
Some examples of research at this level could include:

   ● Research that involves inducing powerful AI models to behave in dangerous
     ways, such as behavioral and propensity evaluations for dangerous capabilities
     like deception and persuasion [193];

   ● The development of some sets of private AI evaluations that should be withheld
     from frontier labs to avoid compromising the integrity of model audits (see
     3.2.2);

   ● Some kinds of fundamental AGI alignment research, particularly if they require
     direct access to frontier models;

   ● Mechanistic interpretability research that requires direct access to frontier
     models [194]; and

   ● Research into on-device monitoring for AI chips that could benefit from frontier
     labs’ engineering resources or expertise in scaled AI training runs [148].

Given the potential sensitivity of research in this category, researchers and model
evaluators may require dedicated infrastructure to support secure access to the weights
of frontier AI models. We describe a high-level weight-sharing protocol that could meet
this requirement in Annex M: Secure temporary storage of model weights. In addition
to directly funding private collaborations with AI labs, the government could fund the
development of secure information-sharing infrastructure to ensure this research can
occur securely and with minimal friction.

3.1.1.3 National security research

The most high-risk category of AGI safety research will likely involve unrestricted access
to frontier AI models to evaluate propensities for highly dangerous capabilities,
including WMD-like and WMD-enabling capabilities. This category of research will
need to be conducted in a classified environment by cleared researchers following
appropriate security procedures. Some kinds of model evaluations overseen by entities
such as the ASTF (see LOE1, 1.4.1.2) or a permanent regulator (see LOE4, 4.1.2.1) may
need to be classified at this level.

Similarly to proprietary research (see 3.1.1.2), this level of research would enable a
capability for secure sharing of the weights of frontier AI models. See Annex M: Secure



                                                                                  93 of 284
temporary storage of model weights for a description of a high-level protocol for
weight-sharing.

3.1.2 Organizational framework

The U.S. government would need the ability to identify, fund, and administer promising
research projects at each of the sensitivity levels in 3.1.1. Each level may have a
different set of oversight, administration, and funding conditions that reflect its degree
of risk and access requirements.

The U.S. government has already begun developing a capacity that could support such
activities. In January 2024, the National Science Foundation (NSF) launched a pilot
program for a National AI Research Resource (NAIRR) [195,196], whose budget is
estimated to reach $2.6 billion over an initial six-year period. The NAIRR also includes
an initiative called NAIRR Secure, which aims to support research involving sensitive
data by assembling secure compute clusters and other privacy-preserving resources
[197]. One of the NAIRR’s four key goals is to advance trustworthy AI [198].

Many of the AI safety and security research areas relevant to mitigating catastrophic
risk from advanced AI are aligned with this NAIRR key goal. As a result, we believe that
relevant research directions at each of the relevant sensitivity levels (see 3.1.1) could be
directly supported by:50

    ● The NAIRR, through a dedicated National Center for AI Alignment and Security
      Research (NCAASR) established under the NAIRR;

    ● A new AI Alignment and Security (AAS) Federally Funded Research and
      Development Center (FFRDC), possibly in collaboration with the NAIRR;51 or




50 Given that there are ongoing U.S. government workstreams in this area, we recommend considering

these options in conjunction with other entities that could already be in development.

51 One advantage of an AAS FFRDC is that it could be sponsored by organizations such as the Defense

Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity
(IARPA), or the DOE’s National Laboratories, which all have established CBRN research capabilities that
could support in designing AI evaluations for frontier models. An AAS FFRDC would also offer the
government a classified and secure environment in which researchers can be paid industry-competitive
salaries. This is a particularly important factor given the prevailing level of compensation at frontier AI
labs (see LOE1, 1.4.2).


                                                                                                   94 of 284
    ● Both a NCAASR and a new AAS FFRDC, with research areas divided between
      them and research collaborations in areas of mutual interest.

We recommend that these Centers establish a review process to determine which kinds
of safety research should remain unpublished, and base decisions on national security
risk assessments (LOE4, 4.1.4).52 This review process could also be informed by an
ASTF’s work under LOE1, 1.4.1.3 and be developed in consultation with members of
the technical AI safety community.

These Centers could also advance basic scientific research into AGI alignment,
normalize the field, and grow the overall pool of researchers.

3.1.2.1 Considerations for AGI alignment research

Many alignment techniques that work on less capable AI systems are not expected to
work on AGI-level systems [84] (Introduction, 0.5.1.4). It is also easier to make
measurable progress on sub-AGI alignment than on AGI-scalable alignment. As a
result, we recommend that these Centers define and fund research workstreams fully
and exclusively dedicated to developing alignment techniques that are intended to
scale to AGI-level systems. Absent a clear institutional prioritization of AGI-scalable
alignment, research effort funded by the Centers risks being expended in areas in
which progress is more legible but less scalable.53

See Annex B: The full challenge of AGI alignment for a discussion of the reason why
alignment techniques that work on advanced AI systems may fail once these systems
reach high enough capability levels. See Annex L: AI safety and security research topics
for a list of possible research topics that an NCAASR and AAS FFRDC could fund or
support.




52 This could also be done in coordination with the I&W and contingency planning efforts in LOE2, 2.3

and 2.4.

53 Moreover, many forms of sub-AGI alignment research deliver immediate economic returns by making

it easier for users to extract value from better-aligned, sub-AGI scale systems. As a result, these research
areas already benefit from substantial investment by private-sector frontier AI labs.


                                                                                                   95 of 284
3.1.2.2 Research collaborations

Centers such as the NCAASR and/or AAS FFRDC could be instrumental in developing
a regime of technical RADA safeguards (LOE1, 1.3.2) to mitigate potential catastrophic
AI risks from weaponization and loss of control. The Centers could collaborate with the
NIST U.S. AISI to standardize this safeguards regime (see 3.2.3), and with entities such
as an ASTF (LOE1, 1.4.1.2) or future regulatory body (LOE4, 4.1.2.1, 4.1.2.2, and
4.1.2.4) to implement and oversee those standards. These Centers could also
collaborate with and support AI safety and security initiatives across the U.S.
government and beyond, including:

   ● The BIS in periodic reviews of export controls related to catastrophic AI risk
     mitigation, including support with on-chip monitoring initiatives (LOE1, 1.5.3);

   ● The Department of Commerce and DHS for export license red teaming
     exercises (LOE1, 1.5.3);

   ● The IC to support creating and updating I&W frameworks (LOE2, 2.3.3);

   ● The NSC to support creating and updating contingency plans (LOE2, 2.4);
   ●
   ● The ASTF to help prepare for a future regulatory regime (Annex K, K.2); and

   ● Through the Department of State, international partners such as the U.K.
     Frontier AI Taskforce and the U.K. AI Safety Institute (U.K. AISI) [199].

Operationally, with the support of the NAIRR, the Centers could also foster direct
collaboration between independent AI safety and security researchers, academics, and
industry, including frontier labs. This could include funding the development of
infrastructure to support secure information sharing with frontier labs (e.g., NAIRR
Secure [197]). It could also offer researchers access to computing resources [198].

3.1.2.3 Sensitive research areas

Certain types of research aimed at mitigating catastrophic weaponization risk from
CBRN, cyber, and other applications enabled by advanced AI will require direct access
to frontier models, secure information environments, and cleared personnel (see
3.1.1.3). This may also be the case for some categories of research investigating the
risk of loss of control due to alignment failure of high-capability AI systems.



                                                                                 96 of 284
The level of security required to support such research will likely require close
coordination between frontier AI labs, the teams conducting the research, the IC, and
the Centers supporting the research. The Centers would also need infrastructure to
support highly secure sharing of information with frontier labs, including model weights
(see 3.1.1.3).

Given the substantial overlap in requirements and likely collaboration in other areas,
the Centers could also consider sharing infrastructure between sensitive AI research
initiatives and the regulatory bodies overseeing private-sector AI scaling, including
model evaluations for CBRN and other capabilities (Annex K, K.1 and LOE4, 4.1.3.4.3).


3.2 Standards for AI evaluations and RADA safeguards

Without clear standards for responsible AI development and adoption (RADA),
advanced AI developers lack principles against which to judge the adequacy of their
safety and security practices. Self-regulatory industry bodies such as the FMF
(Introduction, 0.4.1) could have a positive influence on the development of such
standards. But competitive pressures — including from challenger labs whose models
lag the public frontier by 12 months or less, and are even less rigorous in their safety
measures [51,200,201] (Annex D, D.1) — ultimately drive even the frontier labs to
employ inconsistent and inadequate safety and security practices (Introduction, 0.5.1.4,
0.5.1.5, and 0.5.3.1).

It is therefore crucial to develop standards for RADA safeguards which address
catastrophic risks from weaponization and loss of control in a rigorous and technically
informed manner. These should include standards for the evaluation of AI models’
behaviors and propensities to display dangerous capabilities [46]. NIST, through the
U.S. AISI [202], is currently spearheading U.S. government efforts to develop and
promulgate AI evaluation standards consistent with the NIST AI Risk Management
Framework [203].

In addition to AI evaluations, standards for effective RADA safeguards will also need to
comprehensively address security, risk governance, incident reporting, and other key
issues across multiple layers of the advanced AI supply chain. See LOE1, 1.3.2 for our
recommendations on guiding principles behind these standards.

Finally, ongoing refinement and updating of standards for RADA safeguards could be
supported by expanded national research capacity in AI safety and security research as
described in 3.1.



                                                                                 97 of 284
3.2.1 Limitations of AI evaluations

AI evaluations are important tools to increase confidence in the safety and security of
advanced AI systems and support RADA safeguards. And depending on the degree of
coverage and prior real-world experience with an evaluation set, passing a set of AI
safety evaluations may offer a strong positive indicator of the safety of an AI system.
But AI evaluations are inadequate on their own to fully assure that an AI system or
model is safe to develop or deploy, because they suffer from a number of fundamental
limitations in coverage and reliability [204]. We list below some of these key limitations,
and discuss ways to mitigate their impacts in 3.2.2.

3.2.1.1 AI evaluations are not comprehensive

Current AI evaluations cannot provide comprehensive coverage of an advanced AI
model’s behavior or risk surface. If there is a dangerous behavior or set of behaviors
that is not included in the test suite used to evaluate a model, then that behavior will
not be detected, and it could be displayed or elicited under real world conditions [206]
including under high-risk conditions.

There is also currently no way to reliably predict the emergence of capabilities,
dangerous or otherwise, from advanced AI systems as they are scaled or augmented
[165,206]. This means that not only do researchers have no way of knowing in advance
which kinds of evaluations will be most informative for future AI systems, but they also
have no way to reliably predict how an existing AI system will behave if it is fine-tuned
or otherwise augmented. In particular, open-access AI systems can be augmented in
any number of ways that may be entirely unanticipated by the system’s original
developers or the evaluators themselves (Introduction, 0.5.1.6). Therefore, as limited as
AI evaluations are for substantiating the safety of proprietary AI systems, they are even
more limited when applied to open-access AI systems.

3.2.1.2 AI evaluations cannot con rm that a dangerous capability is
absent

AI evaluation techniques today are empirical. They generally function by feeding a
model a wide range of input prompts and observing its outputs.54



54 More sophisticated techniques may fine-tune a model to attempt to elicit latent capabilities. This is a

more effective approach than prompting, but is still limited.


                                                                                                  98 of 284
                                 fi
If the model returns a dangerous output in response to an evaluation, this may show
that the model has a dangerous capability. But if the model does not return a
dangerous output in response to the evaluation, this could be because the evaluator
failed to identify an effective prompt, or for other reasons, rather than because the
model does not have the evaluated capability. Even small changes to prompting
techniques often reveal latent capabilities that were not detected by prior evaluations
[207]. As a result, AI evaluations can only reveal the presence, but not con rm the
absence, of dangerous capabilities [204].

3.2.1.3 AI evaluations are highly vulnerable to manipulation

AI evaluations can be undermined and manipulated easily. If an AI model fails an
evaluation, its developer can fine-tune the model — or make other superficial changes
to it — until the model passes that evaluation, without addressing the underlying cause
of the failure.

For example, suppose an AI model fails a cyberattack evaluation by complying with a
user request to write working malware. In this case, it is easier for the model’s
developer to train it to refuse the particular user request it was tested on, than to
rigorously investigate and address the underlying cause of the behavior. But this
superficial approach could leave the model vulnerable to jailbreaks [83,208] that induce
the model to display the undesirable behavior under slightly more complex conditions.
In other words, the dangerous capability can remain latent, even if an AI model passes
the evaluation. Moreover, if an AI developer is able to resubmit fine-tuned or
“patched” models for evaluation an arbitrary number of times, the resubmitted models
may eventually pass the original evaluations purely or partly by chance [46].55

Given the prevailing competitive environment, frontier AI labs and other advanced AI
developers face a strong incentive to game evaluations in this way (see 0.5.3.1). In fact,
by the private judgment of one expert with direct knowledge of the matter, this has
already begun to occur at one major frontier AI lab. Moreover, AI developers also face
related incentives to argue that models that pass unreliable evaluations should still be
considered safe for the purpose of further development or deployment.




55 One frontier AI researcher stated during a private discussion that passing a dangerous capability

evaluation provides little evidence that the model is safe, if the lab developing the model is allowed to
resubmit tweaked versions of the model for re-evaluation until the evaluation is passed. As they put it,
“There's a key step [missing] here of figuring out what went wrong.”


                                                                                                 99 of 284
                                                                            fi
3.2.1.4 AI evaluations could fail systematically in high-capability
regimes

At higher levels of capability, advanced AI and near-AGI systems could develop the
capability to infer whether a given interaction is part of their training, their testing, or
their deployment. This property is called situational awareness [209,210], and
researchers at major frontier labs believe it could arise as an emergent capability in
future AI systems [209].

If an AI system can infer that it is being tested, it may have the ability to produce
different outputs when it is being tested than when it is deployed. In principle this
could allow the AI model to manipulate its own evaluations, by producing apparently
safe outputs in response to evaluation queries in testing, and unsafe outputs in
response to real user queries in deployment [209]. This hypothesized behavior is known
as deceptive alignment [45] . Deceptive alignment remains a speculative and
controversial risk [211], but if it manifests, it could systematically undermine the entire
effectiveness of a naive AI evaluations regime.56

3.2.2 Addressing the limitations of AI evaluations

There are several possible strategies to lessen the impacts of the above limitations on
the value of AI evaluations as safety signals.

First, a diverse ecosystem of independent AI model evaluators is crucial.
Independence is crucial because model developers are heavily incentivized to pass
safety evaluations by making superficial changes that do not address underlying drivers
of risk (see 3.1.2.3). Independent evaluators can administer private evaluation sets,
whose exact protocols are not known to AI model developers, and that are therefore
more difficult to pass by superficial means. Independence also means that AI
evaluators should not be selected by the AI developers they are evaluating, to avoid
obvious conflicts of interest. Diversity, on the other hand, is crucial because current AI
behavioral evaluations are unreliable, and failing to observe a dangerous capability
may not mean that the capability is actually absent (see 3.2.1.1). A diverse ecosystem
of evaluators supports multiple independent evaluation strategies and this
combination is more likely to detect a dangerous capability if one is present.

56 It is also important not to anthropomorphize these risks. Deceptive alignment is not expected to arise

due to sentience, human-projected drives, or consciousness, but rather because, under certain
circumstances, it may simply be an effective behavior for the purpose of achieving the goals an AI
system has internalized during its training.


                                                                                               100 of 284
Second, a diverse set of AI evaluations, with different private subsets developed,
refined, and administered by different evaluators, is also crucial. This is because there is
no way to fully assess the capability surfaces of modern advanced AI models (see
3.2.1.1). The broader the set of teams, and the more diverse the evaluations, the lower
the chance that dangerous capabilities and other risk vectors are unexamined. This also
means that standards bodies should avoid overspecifying the parameters of AI
evaluations — with the exception of the security conditions under which they should be
administered.57

Finally, because AI evaluations may have fundamental limitations (see 3.2.1.4), over-
reliance on AI evaluations could propagate a false sense of security among AI
developers, regulators. Instead, AI evaluations could be considered as one part of a
multifaceted case for model safety and security, consistent with the principle of
defense in depth.

3.2.3 Standards for RADA safeguards under catastrophic risk

For recommended principles to guide standards development for RADA safeguards
under catastrophic risk, see LOE1, 1.3.2.

For an example of a complete standards framework for RADA safeguards, including
sample calculations of thresholds for covered entities, see LOE4, 4.1.3.




57 Because dangerous capability evaluations often involve actively eliciting dangerous capabilities, in

high-capability regimes the evaluations themselves could become sources of risk and should therefore
observe strict operational security precautions.


                                                                                                101 of 284
