LOE4: Formalize safeguards for responsible AI
development and adoption by establishing an AI
regulatory agency and legal liability framework

We are grateful to the team at the Center for AI Policy (CAIP), whose perspectives on
AI regulation have informed several of the recommendations in this LOE.




Interim regulations may be inadequate to address the risks and challenges of advanced
AI. The unique challenges involved in assigning responsibility for potential catastrophic
accidents to individuals or organizations who develop or use these advanced AI
systems creates an ambiguous legal environment. This ambiguity offers Americans
weak protections against the impact of reckless or negligent development or use of
powerful AI systems (Introduction, 0.5.4.1). A legal framework for AI regulation and
liability, that directly addresses potential catastrophic risk through detailed and flexible
RADA safeguards overseen by a permanent regulatory agency, is essential to promote
long-term stability and cover any gaps in existing authorities. This legal framework
should carefully balance the need to mitigate potential catastrophic threats against the
risk of curtailing innovation, particularly if regulatory burdens are imposed on small-
scale entities (Introduction, 0.4.2).




                                                                                  102 of 284
This LOE outlines specific actions the Legislative Branch could take to establish the
conditions for long-term (4+ years) domestic AI safety and security. These actions
include:

    ● Creating a Frontier AI Systems Administration (FAISA), a regulatory agency
      with rulemaking and licensing authorities to oversee AI development and
      deployment (see 4.1), consistent with a set of RADA safeguards regulations
      derived from contingency planning requirements (see 4.1.3); and

    ● Establishing a criminal and civil liability regime that could include defining
      responsibility for AI-induced damages; determining the extent of culpability for
      AI accidents and weaponization across all levels of the AI supply chain; and
      defining emergency powers to respond to dangerous and fast-moving AI-related
      incidents which could cause irreversible national security harms (see 4.2).

We expect that such a legal regime would begin to meaningfully impact advanced AI
safety within about 3 years. While we expect such a legal regime to be essential for
long-term safety and security, the 3-year impact timeline also highlights the importance
of rapidly putting in place effective interim measures, as recommended in LOE1.58


4.1 Establish the Frontier AI Systems Administration (FAISA)

Consistent with ongoing public and congressional discussions on AI policy, the
Congress could establish an agency to regulate, license, and monitor advanced AI
model developers and other entities in the advanced AI supply chain.59 This agency,
which we refer to here as the Frontier AI Systems Administration (FAISA), would have
the mission to implement responsible AI development (RADA) safeguards to
mitigate catastrophic national security threats from AI weaponization and loss of
control related to the domestic development or use of advanced AI systems.

This mission would require the FAISA to make decisions with profound implications for
the AI industry in an objective, technically informed, and evidence-based manner. The

58 See http://aipolicy.us/gladstone for a proposed Act drafted by the Center for AI Policy (CAIP), which

could achieve the above objectives in a technically informed manner, and from which many of the
legislative recommendations in this LOE are drawn.

59 The components of the AI supply chain covered under this licensing proposal are: AI hardware design

firms; data center infrastructure providers; AI hardware owners; and AI model developers.
Semiconductor fabrication firms and their suppliers could be covered under an expanded proposal. See
the Glossary of terms for definitions of each of these supply chain components.


                                                                                               103 of 284
agency would also need to earn and maintain a high degree of public trust by acting –
and being seen to act – in the long-term interest of the United States. Consistent with
these requirements, the FAISA could be established in one of two ways:

   ● As a non-partisan agency reporting directly to the President, in the model of the
     SEC.

   ● In an existing department with an ample existing technical capability (such as
     DOE), in the model of the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA)
     [212]. This could involve the FAISA reporting to an NSC-level official (LOE2, 2.1).

The FAISA could be led by an Administrator, who could be appointed by the President
with the Senate's advice and consent. The FAISA’s strategic outlook and day-to-day
operations would be highly sensitive to nuanced technical considerations, so we
recommend choosing the FAISA Administrator based on expertise at the crossroads of
security and advanced technology, including in areas such as cybersecurity or
biosecurity.

The FAISA could perform the following key functions:

   ● Licensing: Overseeing rulemaking, especially concerning AI licensing, ensuring
     that critical RADA safeguards are in place and operating.

   ● Monitoring: Supervising hardware monitoring, tracking AI hardware locations,
     and ensuring hardware is accounted for; and performing horizon-scanning for
     domestic and foreign AI programs (LOE1, 1.2).

   ● Enforcement: Investigating regulatory violations, bringing civil cases in the
     courts, and referring criminal cases to the Department of Justice (DOJ).

   ● Algorithms: Monitoring the progression of AI algorithmic efficiency, suggesting
     updates to technical licensing thresholds, tiers, and conditions (Introduction,
     0.5.1.6 and 0.5.3.2; Annex G, G.3).

4.1.1 FAISA appropriations and staf ng

In order to fulfill this mission, the FAISA would need the ability to react in real time to
changes in the complex and fast-moving AI landscape. This could include making rapid
and unexpected changes to its regulations, oversight and enforcement practices, or
personnel allocations. This requirement implies the need for significant funding and the


                                                                                 104 of 284
                                  fi
authority to rapidly reallocate institutional attention to address new challenges as they
arise.60 One way of achieving this would be to provide the FAISA with no-year funding
and full notwithstanding appropriations. This would help to ensure that arbitrary fiscal
year constraints do not disrupt FAISA activities or slow down its ability to execute
quickly. Alternatively, the FAISA could leverage Research, Development, Test, and
Evaluation (RDT&E) appropriations, which could allow it to spend funds on an as-
needed basis.

We recommend that the FAISA Administrator have the authority to hire both regular
employees and those in priority positions, with the latter being roles that demand
unique or advanced skills. Because many FAISA positions will need to be staffed by
personnel with deep technical expertise in advanced AI, it will also likely require
compensation waivers (LOE1, 1.4.2). We also recommend that strict conflict-of-interest
rules be put in place for these positions to prevent potential biases, along with
restrictions on the subsequent employment of Administrators and other senior
personnel to prevent potential conflicts.

4.1.2 FAISA activities

4.1.2.1 Oversee licensing regime for safe AI scaling

The FAISA could undertake the following oversight activities:

    ● Develop and oversee a licensing procedure for entities throughout the AI supply
      chain, ensuring each adheres to specific RADA safeguards. In the case of entities
      that function as AI cloud providers,61 this would include the cloud provider
      implementing KYC and other conditions on any downstream entities that use
      their infrastructure to train large AI models, including foreign entities (LOE1,



60 In private conversations, frontier labs have emphasized the need for a high degree of regulatory

flexibility. One well-known frontier lab shared, “it remains scientifically challenging to understand the
precise nature of the risk posed, and to design appropriate evaluations and mitigations. It is important
that the external environment is conducive to rapid development and iteration on these policies so that
they achieve the goal of setting sufficient safeguards.”

61 Using our standard definitions, an AI cloud provider is a combination of a data center infrastructure

provider and an AI hardware owner. Cloud providers like Google, AWS, and Azure operate by renting
access to the AI hardware they own (making them AI hardware owners), which they house and maintain
in their data centers (making them also data center infrastructure providers). See the Glossary of terms
for full definitions of these entities.


                                                                                                105 of 284
      1.5.2).

   ● Coordinate with government and private sector cyber, operational, and physical
     security efforts to ensure all licensed entities enact adequate security measures
     to protect critical IP including model weights. The FAISA could also coordinate
     with the AI safety community, industry, and other security experts to develop
     and share best practices in model containment.

   ● Oversee third-party administration of AI model evaluations [46], including
     receiving licensed entities’ responses to reports of failed evaluations. To this
     end, the FAISA would need to create and administer an application process in
     which third-party evaluators and red teams are vetted for access to advanced AI
     model weights through a secure temporary storage mechanism (LOE3, 3.1.1.2
     and 3.1.1.3). We recommend that the FAISA itself select these third-party
     evaluators, to avoid the risk of conflict of interest inherent in an AI model
     developer choosing its own evaluators (LO3, 3.2.2).

   ● Coordinate with NAIRR and federal research Centers (LOE3, 3.1.2) to support
     operational collaborations between licensed entities and AI safety experts which
     may include model weight access via secure temporary storage. It could also
     support dangerous capability red teaming collaborations between licensed
     entities and domain area CBRN and cybersecurity experts, including those with
     access to classified information.

   ● Fund public prizes, hackathons, and bounties for successful jailbreaks, exploits,
     and hacks of already-deployed AI systems open to any developers.

4.1.2.2 Monitor AI hardware concentrations and AI programs

The FAISA could undertake the following activities as part of its mandate to monitor
significant AI programs and concentrations of AI hardware:

   ● Establish and operate a registry of AI hardware to record the locations of
     individual GPUs and other AI-optimized computing devices. Depending on
     feasibility, it could implement a random sampling program to verify that AI chips
     are indeed present at the reported locations [155,213,214]. We recommend that
     it also be given authorities and resources to perform spot check inspections of
     labs and computing hardware, similar to those conducted by the SEC on
     financial institutions.



                                                                               106 of 284
    ● Establish a horizon-scanning function to track large AI programs or collaborate
      with existing government programs that serve the same function (for example,
      an AIO; LOE1, 1.2.1). As it becomes aware of undeclared domestic frontier AI
      programs, the FAISA could refer them to its Enforcement division. As it becomes
      aware of new foreign frontier AI programs, it could provide reports to elements
      of the government working on I&W development and contingency planning for
      AI risk (LOE2, 2.3 and 2.4). Because of the unique nature of its activities and
      ongoing engagement with frontier AI labs, the FAISA could serve as a critical
      information source to contingency planners.

    ● Coordinate with the research community on the development, testing, and
      implementation of systems for real-time automated monitoring of AI hardware
      (Annex L, L.4). As better hardware-enabled AI safeguards are developed, the
      FAISA could mandate their use by licensed entities.

4.1.2.3 Enforce licensing and reporting requirements

The FAISA may need to investigate and prosecute violations of its licensing regime by
licensed entities. It could work with the DOJ to identify, investigate, and prosecute
unlicensed or unlawful AI-related activities in U.S. jurisdictions.62 The FAISA’s primary
aim in its enforcement actions should be to deter safety and security breaches,
consistent with its overall mission to mitigate catastrophic risks from advanced AI.

4.1.2.4 Update technical thresholds for licensing

We recommend that the FAISA maintain a function to monitor ongoing advances in AI
algorithmic efficiency, AI capabilities, and technical AI safety, and periodically update
the conditions that organizations must meet to fulfill their ongoing licensing
requirements at each tier. As part of this function, the FAISA could coordinate with
federal AI research Centers (LOE3, 3.1.2) and standards bodies (LOE3, 3.2) to track
developments in technical AI safety.

We also recommend that the FAISA be empowered to introduce new tiers of licensed
entities as it deems necessary. In connection with this, the FAISA may, for example:


62 Under this arrangement, the DOJ could be responsible for prosecuting criminal breaches of the

licensing regime while the FAISA itself would bring civil cases as is the case for the SEC. This creates a
need for close coordination between the FAISA and DOJ, and for some DOJ personnel to be trained on
catastrophic AI risks from weaponization and loss of control. See LOE2, 2.2.1 for information about key
training objectives and outcomes.


                                                                                               107 of 284
   ● Review and approve proposals for new AI evaluations to be added, changed, or
     removed from the evaluation sets that define key licensing thresholds, on the
     advice of vetted third parties;

   ● Update compliance requirements associated with AI hardware tracking;

   ● Modify KYC conditions based on historical patterns of usage and assessed risks
     of misuse; and

   ● Generally add, remove, or modify conditions associated with licensing tiers.

When updating technical thresholds, adding or removing licensing tiers, or changing
the conditions of licensing tiers, we recommend that the FAISA provide affected
organizations with a minimum of 30 days’ notice to comply with the updated
requirements. However, during this notice period, we also recommend that the FAISA
be empowered to order emergency pauses to individual AI training runs that are
impacted by the updated requirements.

Proposed updates to regulatory tiers could also be subject to Presidential review and
approval. If the FAISA intends to make such an update, it could also be required to
notify the Congress, and to provide the Congress with the opportunity to submit
guidance to the FAISA within a reasonable timeframe (e.g. 30 days).

4.1.2.5 Maintain information repositories

The FAISA could undertake the following activities related to the storage and security
of private information, and dissemination of public information:

   ● Maintain private and secure registries of key proprietary information shared by
     the licensed entities. This could include registries of AI hardware serial numbers,
     physical data center locations, planned and ongoing training runs, and any other
     datasets needed in support of the FAISA’s mission. This could also include a
     secure temporary storage system to store model weights in support of third-
     party administration of private evaluations.63

   ● Maintain and publish information about various aspects of its operations. This
     may include the high-level results of safety evaluations for advanced AI models,

63 See Annex M: Secure temporary storage of model weights for more information.



                                                                                  108 of 284
      announcements of changes to licensing thresholds, and notices regarding
      enforcement actions.

4.1.3 Comprehensive framework for RADA safeguards

All numerical licensing thresholds in this RADA safeguards framework are solely for the
purpose of showing sample calculations and assumptions. Regulators, such as the
FAISA, should determine and adjust thresholds based on regular consultations with
technical experts.

We recommend that the FAISA develop, maintain, and enforce a comprehensive
licensing regime of RADA safeguards. The FAISA should ultimately decide the details
and numerical thresholds of the licensing regime subject to expert advice and input
from other relevant entities (LOE1, 1.4.1.3; LOE2, 2.4; LOE3, 3.1.2).

To support its development, in this section we outline an example licensing regime
along with sample reasoning and calculations for all its licensing thresholds. Our hope
is that this example can form the basis of a set of RADA safeguards for advanced AI.
The specific values we provide as licensing thresholds in this section are far less
important than the principles we follow to determine them: defense in depth,
breakout timeline control, and advance warning. (See below for details.) For each
licensing threshold we give in this section, we show the full calculation we used to
derive that threshold so that it can be updated easily as the situation evolves.

Under these RADA safeguards, the FAISA would oversee licensing and enforcement
activities for four types of entities:

   ● AI hardware designers;

   ● Data center infrastructure providers;

   ● AI hardware owners; and

   ● AI model developers.




                                                                               109 of 284
See the Glossary of terms for more information on each of these entity categories.64

Each entity category would be subject to a tiered licensing regime. AI hardware
designers, data center infrastructure providers, and AI hardware owners would be
subject to a two-tiered regime, and AI model developers to a four-tiered regime. These
tiers are designed to distinguish high-stakes advanced AI development and
deployment activities that require closer regulatory oversight, from lower-stakes
activities that can proceed with fewer safeguards. The thresholds defining each tier
would generally relate to direct assessments or proxies of AI capabilities and risks
wherever possible, but in the absence of such assessments, could be anchored on
compute power and usage.65

The licensing framework would apply equally to industry, academic, and government-
developed models. This could include models developed as components of defense
applications or other national security systems (see 4.3).66 The risk this framework
addresses is not only that a bad actor may misuse or weaponize a powerful model, but
also that a powerful model could be dangerous in and of itself, regardless of who
develops or uses it (Introduction, 0.2.2).

Below is an overview of an example RADA safeguards licensing regime, along with
suggested initial thresholds for each tier and entity category. These thresholds were
determined as of early September 2023, following a defense in depth philosophy. In
choosing each threshold for this example, we ask how long it would take a bad actor to
train a GPT-4 level model, if they could circumvent every other control in the licensing


64 Some entities may have to be regulated under multiple categories. Google, for example, would have

to be regulated under all four categories. It is an AI hardware designer because it designs TPUs; it is a
data center infrastructure provider because it operates its own data centers; it is an AI hardware owner
because it owns and operates the TPUs and GPUs inside its data centers; and it is an AI model developer
because its Google DeepMind unit trains high-compute AI systems.

65 We note that compute power may not be an ideal threshold in the long term, because it could create

perverse incentives to train models whose inner workings are more difficult to understand. For example,
it might take more compute to train an interpretable model to a given level of capability than a less
interpretable model. So a model trained with less compute could eventually be more capable but less
interpretable, and therefore more dangerous. Thanks to Alan Chan at GovAI for this observation.

66 One precedent for related controls is the decision to restrict biological research facilities from storing

certain high-consequence pathogens, such as smallpox. This restriction applies even to labs specially
designed to handle the most contagious pathogens, like biosafety level 4 laboratories. The rationale is
the same here: a single breach of containment could result in unrecoverable catastrophic damage
(Introduction, 0.5.1.1).


                                                                                                   110 of 284
regime except for that threshold. We then set each threshold to ensure this breakout
timeline is no less than 18 months, to give contingency planning efforts (LOE2, 2.4)
advance warning of domestic AGI breakout scenarios.

This standard for breakout timelines leads, in some cases, to relatively low threshold
values. In part this is because we intentionally make conservative assumptions at every
level of the analysis (see, e.g., the discussion of sparsity in 4.1.3.1). This is an illustration
of the defense-in-depth principle, though policymakers should consult academic and
industry experts and carefully consider which of these assumptions to retain in setting
and updating licensing thresholds (LOE1, 1.3.2). In general, the specific assumptions
and licensing thresholds in any set of RADA safeguards may need to be frequently
reviewed and updated because they can go out of date quickly.




           Figure 6. Summary of an example licensing regime for RADA safeguards.

The FAISA would be empowered to adjust the thresholds that define each tier and
entity category (see 4.1.2.4). It would also be empowered to define new licensing tiers
that would apply to each entity category. The FAISA could lower these thresholds over
time, as algorithmic improvements reduce the amount of compute needed to achieve a




                                                                                       111 of 284
given AI capability level [215].67 The FAISA could also raise some thresholds gradually if
no signs of dangerous behaviors are detected at high AI capability levels.68

The licensing and regulatory requirements associated with each entity type and tier
under this RADA safeguards framework are discussed in detail below.

4.1.3.1 AI hardware designers (AIHDs)

AI hardware designers (AIHDs) design AI-optimized chips. Examples include NVIDIA,
Google, AMD, Intel, AWS, and Cerebras. Under this RADA safeguards framework,
AIHDs would be subject to a two-tiered regulatory structure. See the Glossary of terms
for more information on this entity category.




67 One challenge is that if the FAISA lowers its thresholds for AI training runs, it would make more AI

models subject to restrictive conditions. This could create an incentive for AI model developers to train
models as quickly as possible under new algorithmic paradigms, in an effort to develop a new highly
capable model before it becomes subject to the new threshold. The Tier 2 requirement to pre-register
training runs (see 4.1.3.4.2) mitigates this problem by signaling such an effort to the FAISA in advance.

68 Given the potential safety ramifications of relaxing thresholds for licensing tiers, we would expect the

FAISA to do this only if several conditions are met. For example, (1) no signs of dangerous behaviors at
high capability levels, despite significant time and effort invested in detecting and eliciting such
behavior; (2) convincing evidence from interpretability research indicating AI models at this level are safe
and aligned; (3) continuous monitoring of deployed model behavior over long time periods with no
indications of dangerous behaviors; and, in the longer term for highly capable AI systems (4) robust
scientific theories of generalization and foundational AI alignment to ensure alignment generalizes safely
at scale. See the annexes on AI evaluations for more information on these conditions.


                                                                                                 112 of 284
Figure 7. Summary of an example AI hardware designer licensing regime for RADA safeguards.

Under this example set of RADA safeguards, an AI chip is above the hardware
threshold if the chip's maximum compute capacity across all numerical
representations exceeds 20 TOPS,69 with sparsity.

Smaller numerical representations generally allow a chip to perform more operations
per second. For example, the NVIDIA H100 SXM chip [216] can perform 2000 TOPS
with a 16-bit representation, but reaches 4000 TOPS with a smaller 8-bit
representation. Similarly, sparsity is a mathematical shortcut some AI chips use to
achieve a higher effective compute capacity for AI applications like training and
inference, given the fixed number of physical operations the chip can perform. It is
important to specify that a TOPS threshold applies with sparsity, because otherwise
chipmakers could use improved sparsity algorithms to increase their chips’ effective
performance on AI applications, while remaining under a threshold of physical TOPS.70

To derive the hardware threshold, we suppose that an AI model developer intends to
train a GPT-4 equivalent AI system, using only AI chips below the 20 TOPS hardware


69 Trillions of operations; equivalent to 2 x 10^13 OPS. See the Glossary of terms for more information.


70 According to an expert view, sparsity is not generally used in current large AI training runs, but this

may change in the future. All our thresholds assume sparsity to give an additional margin of error,
consistent with the idea of defense in depth.


                                                                                                  113 of 284
threshold in order to avoid this licensing requirement. In the worst case, such a training
run would take approximately 19 months to complete, assuming a cluster of 40,000
such chips.71

4.1.3.1.1 Tier 1: AIHDs at or below the hardware threshold

Tier 1 AIHDs are not subject to new requirements under these RADA safeguards.

4.1.3.1.2 Tier 2: AIHDs above the hardware threshold

Under these RADA safeguards, Tier 2 AIHDs must be licensed. The licensing threshold
can be changed by the FAISA over time to account for possible algorithmic advances in
AI training that could yield more capable models with smaller compute budgets.

A license to operate in Tier 2 requires that AIHDs:

   ● Adhere to KYC rules established by the FAISA;

   ● Track all purchases of chips above the hardware threshold and report these
     purchases regularly to the FAISA;
   ● Introduce tamper-proof serial numbers to all designed AI chips above the
     hardware threshold [214]; and

   ● As technology allows, introduce tamper-resistant remote shutdown capability to
     all AI chips above the hardware threshold (Annex L, L.4).

Tier 2 AIHD requirements may expand over time to include, for example, the capability
for on-chip storage of memory snapshots [217,218]. This capability could in future
support direct monitoring and validation of AI hardware use (as distinct from AI
hardware ownership). See LOE3, 3.1 for options to fund research into further
monitoring approaches.

4.1.3.2 Data center infrastructure providers (DCIPs)

Data center infrastructure providers (DCIPs) operate the data centers that contain AI
hardware used for model training, including electrical, cooling, security, and other

71 Assuming GPT-4 equivalent training compute of 2 x 10^25 OP and 40,000 chips at 20 TOPS (2 x

10^13 OPS) each, this is calculated as 2 x 10^25 OP / (2 x 10^13 OPS per chip x 40,000 chips x 50%
utilization x 2,592,000 seconds per month) ≈ 19.3 months.


                                                                                           114 of 284
infrastructure, but excluding the AI hardware itself. Examples of DCIPs include Google,
Microsoft, AWS, and Flexential. Like AIHDs, DCIPs would be subject to a two-tiered
regulatory structure under this RADA safeguards framework. See the Glossary of terms
for more information on this entity category.




   Figure 8. Summary of an example data center infrastructure provider licensing regime for
                                    RADA safeguards.

Under this example set of RADA safeguards, a DCIP is above the power consumption
threshold if all its data center facilities, both existing and under construction, taken
together, are expected to consume more than 350 kW of power at any time over the
next 12 month time period.

A data center’s total power consumption is a proxy for the maximum amount of AI
hardware the facility can support. For example, the NVIDIA DGX H100 [219] is a
commonly used AI hardware configuration in data centers, and it consumes 10.2 kW of
power per eight AI chips. Given that about 80% of a data center’s power consumption
goes directly to computing hardware [167,220] (the rest goes to cooling, lighting, and
other support systems), this means each MW of data center power consumption can
support about 630 individual H100 GPUs.72


72 Calculated as (1000 kW per MW) x (8 GPUs per DGX) x (80% efficiency) / (10.2 kW per DGX) ≈ 630

GPUs / MW.


                                                                                          115 of 284
Unfortunately, there is no way to differentiate between data centers that support AI
hardware like GPUs, and those that support traditional computing hardware like central
processing units (CPUs) [115]. In particular, a DCIP could replace a data center’s CPUs
with GPUs relatively easily compared to the cost of building a new, dedicated AI data
center. As a result, the power consumption threshold needs to apply to all of a DCIP’s
data centers, not just those that currently support AI hardware. See Annex G, G.3 for
more details.

To derive the power consumption threshold, we suppose that an AI model developer
intends to train a GPT-4 equivalent AI system, using a dedicated AI data center that
falls below the power consumption threshold in order to avoid this licensing
requirement. In the worst case, such a training run would take approximately 18
months to complete, assuming clandestine access to the H100 DGX system.73

4.1.3.2.1 Tier 1: DCIPs operating data center facilities at or below the power
consumption threshold

Tier 1 DCIPs are not subject to new requirements under these RADA safeguards.

4.1.3.2.2 Tier 2: DCIPs operating data center facilities above the power
consumption threshold

Under these RADA safeguards, Tier 2 DCIPs must be licensed. The licensing threshold
should be adjusted by the FAISA over time, to account for possible algorithmic
advances in AI training that could yield more capable models from smaller compute
budgets, and for efficiency improvements in data center power consumption.

A license to operate in Tier 2 would require that DCIPs:

   ● Report to the FAISA the physical location (i.e., address and Global Positioning
     System (GPS) coordinates) of each data center facility the DCIP operates that is
     individually above the power consumption threshold, both existing and under
     construction;



73 Assuming GPT-4 equivalent training compute of 2 x 10^25 OP and 27 H100 DGX systems totalling (27

DGX systems x 10.2 kW per DGX) / (80% efficiency) ≈ 350 kW of power consumption, this is calculated
as 2 x 10^25 OP / (3.2 x 10^16 OPS per DGX x 27 DGX systems x 50% utilization x 2,592,000 seconds
per month) ≈ 17.9 months.


                                                                                          116 of 284
    ● Report to the FAISA the mix of hardware (and its networking topology)
      supported by each of its data centers both in the U.S. and abroad,74 and
      promptly report any change, loss, transfer, or destruction of AI hardware that
      occurs in each data center, with this reporting automated on a daily basis;

    ● Comply with periodic on-site hardware inspections by the FAISA to confirm that
      the locations and conditions of all AI hardware correspond to reports and that
      no unreported hardware is being used;

    ● Apply FAISA-approved KYC requirements to any Tier 2 AI hardware owners (see
      4.1.3.3.2) who use the DCIP’s infrastructure, and ensure these AI hardware
      owners are in turn applying KYC to AI model developers using their hardware for
      training or inference [221] (see 4.1.3.4);

    ● Promptly respond to law enforcement inquiries made via the FAISA in
      connection with any incidents that may be related to AI systems developed or
      deployed on the DCIP’s data center infrastructure;75 and

    ● Put in place emergency procedures allowing the DCIP to rapidly shut down data
      centers in response to law enforcement requests, FAISA directives, or indications
      of dangerous behaviors or capabilities detected during AI training runs or
      deployments on its infrastructure.

4.1.3.3 AI hardware owners (AIHOs)

AI hardware owners (AIHOs) are the entities that own the AI chips used for model
training and inference. Examples include Google, Microsoft, AWS, and Coreweave.



74 Similar to the banking sector, which is a critical industry with enormous influence that has undertaken

safety and security efforts independent of what is officially mandated, the U.S. cloud and hardware
supply chain could function as an early means of internationalizing domestic U.S. AI safety and security
policy to increase global safety and security from catastrophic AI risk. See LOE1, 1.5.2.

75 In particular, if an AI incident occurs in a given jurisdiction, law enforcement in that jurisdiction should

be able to contact the FAISA with a description of the incident. From this description, the FAISA should
be able to identify to law enforcement the end-customer who used the associated AI system, the
developer who trained and/or deployed the AI system, the hardware owner whose hardware trained the
AI system, and ultimately the DCIP whose infrastructure supported that training hardware. Law
enforcement may include, for example, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), a state cybercrime
squad, local police, state District Attorney's offices, or federal Assistant U.S. Attorney's offices.


                                                                                                     117 of 284
DCIPs and AIHOs are frequently, but not always, the same entities.76 Like AIHDs and
DCIPs, AIHOs would be subject to a two-tiered regulatory structure under this RADA
safeguards framework. See the Glossary of terms for more information on this entity
category.




 Figure 9. Summary of an example AI hardware owner licensing regime for RADA safeguards.

Under this example set of RADA safeguards, an AI hardware owner is above the
aggregate compute capacity threshold if the maximum sparse compute capacities
of all the AI chips it controls or beneficially owns exceeds, in aggregate, 800,000
TOPS. (See 4.1.3.1 for an explanation of sparsity and why we recommend defining
compute capacity as each chip’s maximum TOPS over all supported numerical
representations.)

For example, the NVIDIA H100 SXM chip [216] has a maximum compute capacity of
4000 TOPS, achieved using an 8-bit numerical representation. This means the
aggregate compute capacity threshold of 800,000 TOPS is equivalent to 200 H100
GPUs. (In practice, benchmarking experiments suggest that large AI training runs
achieve around 50% utilization of a GPU’s compute on average, so 200 H100s actually
have an effective aggregate compute capacity of only around 400,000 TOPS [220].)


76 For example, Coreweave is an AIHO but not a DCIP, as it rents the data center infrastructure for its AI

hardware from colocation providers like Flexential (which is itself a DCIP but not an AIHO) [222].


                                                                                                118 of 284
To derive the aggregate compute capacity threshold, we suppose an AI model
developer intends to train a GPT-4 equivalent AI system, using a cluster of AI chips
totalling below the 800,000 TOPS aggregate compute capacity threshold in order to
avoid this licensing requirement. In the worst case, such a training run would take
approximately 19 months to complete.77

4.1.3.3.1 Tier 1: AIHOs who are at or below the aggregate compute
capacity threshold

Tier 1 AIHOs are not subject to new requirements under these RADA safeguards.

4.1.3.3.2 Tier 2: AIHOs who fall above the aggregate compute capacity
threshold

Under these RADA safeguards, Tier 2 AIHOs must be licensed. The licensing threshold
should be adjusted by the FAISA over time, to account for possible algorithmic
advances in AI training that could yield more capable models with smaller compute
budgets.

A license to operate in Tier 2 would require that AIHOs:

    ● Register the locations of all their AI hardware with the FAISA (including GPS
      coordinates for all chips) both in the U.S. and abroad,78 and report any change,
      loss, sale, movement, or destruction of AI hardware, with this reporting
      automated on a daily basis;

    ● Ship all end-of-life, obsolete, or faulty AI hardware back to its original licensed
      AIHD under FAISA supervision, to ensure AI chips are tracked over their entire
      life cycle;




77 Assuming GPT-4 equivalent training compute of 2 x 10^25 OP, this is calculated as 2 x 10^25 OP / (8

x 10^17 OPS x 50% utilization x 2,592,000 seconds per month) ≈ 19.3 months.

78 Similar to the banking sector, which is a critical industry with enormous influence that has undertaken

safety and security efforts independent of what is officially mandated, the U.S. cloud and hardware
supply chain could function as an early means of internationalizing domestic U.S. AI safety and security
policy to increase global safety and security from catastrophic AI risk. See LOE1, 1.5.2.


                                                                                                119 of 284
    ● Comply with periodic mail-in hardware inspections by the FAISA [155], to
      confirm that the locations and conditions of AI hardware correspond to reports
      and that no AI hardware is unaccounted for [148,223,224];

    ● Apply FAISA-approved KYC requirements to any Tier 3 AI model developers
      who use the AIHO’s hardware for training or inference, and ensure these AI
      model developers are in turn complying with the necessary training and
      deployment provisions for their Tier 3 AI models (see 4.1.3.4.3) [221];79

    ● Promptly respond to law enforcement inquiries made via the FAISA in
      connection with any incidents that may be related to AI systems developed or
      deployed on the AIHO’s AI hardware;80 and

    ● Put in place emergency procedures allowing the AIHO to rapidly shut down
      subsets of its AI hardware in response to law enforcement requests, FAISA
      directives, or indications of dangerous behaviors or capabilities detected during
      AI training runs or deployments.

4.1.3.4 AI model developers (AIMDs)

AI model developers (AIMDs) are any entities that create, plan to create, own, or
deploy AI models. Examples include OpenAI, Anthropic, Google DeepMind, Inflection
AI, and Meta. Under this RADA safeguards framework, AIMDs would be subject to a
four-tier regulatory structure whose thresholds are defined by the most powerful AI
system they create, own, or plan to create. See the Glossary of terms for more
information on this entity category.

An entity that does not actively train or create AI models, but still deploys them or
otherwise has beneficial access to a model’s weights, is still considered an AIMD by this


79 This AIHO KYC could include mandated monitoring of network traffic between its AI chips for patterns

indicative of large AI training or inference workloads. This could involve chips with hardware-enabled
mechanisms in encrypted communication with each other, that can remotely attest to whether they are
being used in a training-suggestive way, without providing full visibility into the traffic itself [225].

80 In particular, if an AI incident occurs in a given jurisdiction, law enforcement in the jurisdiction should

be able to contact the FAISA with a description of the incident. From this description, the FAISA should
be able to identify to law enforcement the end-customer who used the associated AI system, the
developer who trained and/or deployed the AI system, and the AIHO whose hardware trained the AI
system. Law enforcement may include, for example, the FBI, a state cybercrime squad, local police, state
District Attorney's offices, or federal Assistant U.S. Attorney's offices.


                                                                                                    120 of 284
definition. If an entity has beneficial access to the weights of a potentially dangerous AI
model, it would have a responsibility to enact security and governance measures to
protect that model’s weights from exfiltration and other forms of proliferation.

In addition to issuing organizational licenses for AIMDs, the FAISA would also be
responsible for reviewing and approving individual training runs and deployment
conditions for AI systems above key thresholds (see 4.1.3.4.2 and 4.1.3.4.3).

In our view, implementing an effective AIMD licensing regime should be a key and
urgent goal of any set of RADA safeguards.




Figure 10. Summary of an example AI model developer licensing regime for RADA safeguards.




                                                                                  121 of 284
4.1.3.4.1 Tier 1: AI models below the registration threshold

Under these RADA safeguards, an AI model falls below the registration threshold if its
total training compute is less than 10^23 OP (i.e., 10^23 total operations). Some AI
systems close to the registration threshold include OpenAI’s original GPT-3, Google’s
internal LaMDA conversational model, and Baidu’s ERNIE 3.0 Titan model, all of which
were developed in 2020 or 2021 [160].

An AI model below the registration threshold is a Tier 1 model. Tier 1 AI models would
not be subject to any restrictions on training, sharing, or use under these RADA
safeguards. An entity that exclusively trains or owns Tier 1 models is a Tier 1 AIMD.
Tier 1 AIMDs would also not be subject to new requirements under these RADA
safeguards.

The FAISA should adjust the registration threshold over time to account for possible
algorithmic advances in AI training that could yield more capable models with smaller
compute budgets. It should also adjust the registration threshold to account for
advances in prompt engineering [226], AI software frameworks such as Auto-GPT [120],
and other advancements in user-level elicitation of AI capabilities. Because Tier 1
models can be released as open-access without restriction, the FAISA should also
consider factors such as fine-tuning techniques for dangerous capabilities in setting
and adjusting the registration threshold, and in informing other updates to law and
policy (Introduction, 0.5.1.6).

It is possible that the FAISA may change the registration threshold in such a way that an
existing, planned, or in-training AI model that fell below the previous registration
threshold (and therefore under Tier 1), now falls above the new registration threshold
(and therefore under Tier 2, see 4.1.3.4.2). If this occurs, the model or training run
should be automatically reclassified as Tier 2 by default, though the FAISA should be
empowered to make individual or broad-based exceptions. In the event of
reclassification, the AIMD should have 30 days to fulfill the Tier 2 registration
conditions with respect to the reclassified model.

We recommend that the FAISA continue to define the registration threshold solely in
terms of a model’s total training compute, to ease the regulatory burden on Tier 1
AIMDs who might otherwise be compelled to run AI capability benchmarks on even
very small AI models (see 4.1.3.4.2).




                                                                               122 of 284
4.1.3.4.2 Tier 2: AI models above the registration threshold, but below the
approval threshold

Under these RADA safeguards, an AI model falls below the approval threshold if:

    ● Its total training compute is less than 10^24 OP (meaning 10^24 total
      operations); and

    ● It achieves a score below 70% on the MMLU machine learning benchmark
      [154].81

Some AI systems close to the approval threshold include OpenAI’s ChatGPT-3.5,
Google’s PaLM model (both developed in 2022), and Meta’s Llama 2 (developed in
2023 as open-access) [154,160].

An AI model above the registration threshold but below the approval threshold is a
Tier 2 model. An entity that exclusively trains or owns Tier 2 AI models or below is a
Tier 2 AIMD.

Tier 2 AI models would be generally considered safe. Therefore, while Tier 2 AIMDs
would need to pre-register training runs for Tier 2 models under this RADA safeguards
framework, they would not need to get FAISA approval before beginning a Tier 2
training run. The intent of Tier 2 is to give the FAISA an up-to-date registry of all AI
models that are close to the high-risk Tier 3 level (see 4.1.3.4.3). This ensures that, if
the approval threshold changes, the FAISA will immediately know which AI systems fall
under the new high-risk Tier 3 category [215].82




81 A model that falls below the registration threshold in compute (i.e., a Tier 1 model) could, in principle,

also score above 70% on MMLU. We do not directly address this possibility in the text because we
believe that such an event would indicate an AI capabilities breakthrough significant enough that it
would warrant the FAISA’s updating the thresholds for all AIMD tiers in any case.

82 In particular, without a Tier 2 that requires model registration, the FAISA could only lower the approval

threshold by either (1) forcing Tier 1 AIMDs to comply with expensive new safety and security conditions,
on penalty of canceling some of their ongoing training runs; or (2) allowing Tier 1 AIMDs to continue
training runs above the new threshold, as long as they claimed a run was started before the threshold
update was announced. The former choice would impose a significant and unpredictable burden on
small developers, while the latter would create a serious safety risk by incentivizing AIMDs to scale up
training as fast as possible in order to “get in under” the new threshold before it came into force.


                                                                                                  123 of 284
Under these RADA safeguards, Tier 2 AIMDs must be licensed. A license to operate in
Tier 2 requires that AIMDs:

    ● Disclose control or beneficial ownership of all their Tier 2 models to the FAISA;

    ● Pre-register all training runs for expected Tier 2 models, including any fine-
      tuning expected to result in a Tier 2 model;83

    ● Run any automated capability benchmark (e.g., MMLU, see above) associated
      with the approval threshold periodically during any training run for a Tier 2
      model; and

    ● Halt a Tier 2 model training run immediately in the event that the automated
      capability benchmark is breached, and promptly report any such breach to the
      FAISA.84

The FAISA should also create new approval thresholds for AI systems that operate on
different data modalities. For example, while the 70% MMLU benchmark may be an
effective threshold for text-based AI systems, image-based or robotic AI systems will
need approval thresholds defined with a different benchmark. The FAISA could also
consider defining approval thresholds in part using normalized capability measures (see
Annex J: Effective compute). Finally, the licensing requirements for Tier 2 AIMDs mean
that Tier 2 models cannot be released under open-access, though the FAISA could be
empowered to make individual or broad-based exceptions to this.

It is possible that the FAISA may change the approval threshold in such a way that an
existing, planned, or in-training AI model that fell below the previous approval
threshold (and therefore under Tier 2), now falls above the new approval threshold (and
therefore under Tier 3, see 4.1.3.4.3). If this occurs, the model or training run should be
grandfathered as Tier 2 by default, but the FAISA should be empowered to classify
such models as Tier 3 on an emergency individual basis. In the event of reclassification,
the AIMD should have 30 days to fulfill the Tier 3 approval conditions with respect to
the reclassified model. Any models that are trained before these regulations come into
force should also be grandfathered in under the same conditions.

83 That is, if the total training compute of the base model, added to the total compute spent in fine-

tuning, is expected to be above the registration threshold (see 4.1.3.4.1).

84 The FAISA may investigate the breach at its discretion, and may request access to additional data

associated with the training run as part of this investigation. The FAISA may also choose to adjust the
AIMD tier thresholds depending on the results of its investigation.


                                                                                                124 of 284
4.1.3.4.3 Tier 3: AI models above the approval threshold, but below the
controlled threshold

Under these RADA safeguards, an AI model falls below the controlled threshold if:

   ● Its total training compute is less than 10^25 OP (meaning 10^25 total
     operations); and

   ● It passes all the conditions of Tier 3 model licensing (see below).

Some AI systems close to the level of training compute that defines the controlled
threshold include OpenAI’s GPT-4 [160], and Google DeepMind’s Gemini [157,227]
(both released in 2023).

An AI model above the approval threshold but below the controlled threshold is a Tier
3 model. An entity that trains or owns Tier 3 AI models or below is a Tier 3 AIMD.

Tier 3 AI models are considered to be powerful enough to constitute a potential
weaponization risk through misuse, exfiltration, or open-source augmentation. They
may also be powerful enough to constitute a potential risk of loss of control due to AGI
alignment failure in the near or medium-term future. But currently, no one knows how
to reliably map or measure the full capabilities of an AI system (LOE3, 3.2.1.1). This
means we need to define Tier 3 models’ capabilities with a wide margin of safety.
Otherwise a model that seems safe, but actually harbors dangerous capabilities, could
be developed and proliferated without controls (Introduction, 0.5.1.6). As a result,
under this RADA safeguards framework, Tier 3 models are considered dangerous until
proven safe.

The intent of Tier 3 is to:

   ● Minimize the risk of unrecoverable harm that could be caused by the
     development, deployment, or proliferation of advanced AI systems
     (Introduction, 0.5.1.1);

   ● Moderate the competitive race dynamics that currently dominate frontier AI
     development in industry, to the detriment of investments in safety (Introduction,
     0.5.3.1);




                                                                               125 of 284
   ● Incentivize and facilitate a fundamental scientific understanding of the
     capabilities and propensities of advanced AI systems, which is crucial to keeping
     AGI-level systems safe and is currently lacking (LOE1, 1.3.2); and

   ● Preserve a pathway through which industry and the public can safely continue to
     benefit from advanced AI (Introduction, 0.4.2).

The risk of unrecoverable harms, combined with our current lack of understanding of AI
capabilities and propensities, compel substantial conditions on Tier 3 AI model
development. For example:

   ● A public leak of a Tier 3 AI model’s weights is an irreversible event that could
     create significant national security risk (Introduction, 0.5.1.6). As a result, Tier 3
     AIMDs should be subject to controls on model weight distribution and internal
     access, combined with severe penalties for leaks including civil and criminal
     liability.

   ● Relatedly, theft or exfiltration of a Tier 3 AI model’s weights by an attacker could
     lead to its weaponization by U.S. adversaries (Introduction, 0.5.1.5). As a result,
     Tier 3 AIMDs should be capable of securing the weights of their Tier 3 models
     against sustained exfiltration attempts by well-resourced attackers.

   ● Closed access AI models are vulnerable to a number of attack vectors from their
     users, including attacks that can reconstruct some or all of the model’s
     capabilities (Introduction, 0.5.1.7). Tier 3 AIMDs should therefore be able to
     implement comprehensive monitoring of their deployed AI systems. This
     monitoring should include implementing KYC procedures on end-users, flagging
     suspicious usage patterns to regulators and law enforcement, and contingency
     plans to cut off access to a deployed model if the AIMD detects signs of
     dangerous usage.

   ● Finally, highly capable Tier 3 AI models could, now or in the future, pose
     meaningful risks of loss of control during development or internal deployment
     (Introduction, 0.2.2 and 0.5.1.4). Tier 3 AIMDs should therefore monitor their AI
     models during training and deployment for signs of dangerous capabilities or
     behavior. They also need to work towards developing a fundamental scientific
     understanding of the internal mechanics of the systems they are building. This
     could be vital to forestall the possibility of deception in near-AGI systems, in
     which an AI system with a misaligned goal could imitate aligned behavior to
     deceive naive behavioral evaluations (LOE3, 3.2.1.4).


                                                                                   126 of 284
  Figure 11. Summary of key licensing requirements at each stage of the AI product lifecycle
                                  under RADA safeguards.

Under these RADA safeguards, Tier 3 AIMDs must be licensed. A license to operate in
Tier 3 would require that AIMDs [228]:

   ● Obtain prior approval from the FAISA to train any Tier 3 model (see Annex N:
     Training approvals process for high-risk AI models for key considerations);

   ● Conduct ongoing monitoring of all Tier 3 training runs, including adhering to
     emergency pause and shutdown procedures as required (see Annex O: Training
     stage monitoring for high-risk AI models for key considerations);

   ● Obtain prior approval from the FAISA to deploy a Tier 3 model under each
     desired context or use case, including for purely internal deployments, or for
     public use via user interface or API (see Annex P: Deployment stage approvals
     for high-risk AI models for key considerations);

   ● Conduct ongoing monitoring of all Tier 3 model deployments, including KYC for
     high-volume or critical use cases, and deployment pauses or rollbacks if high-risk
     usage patterns are detected (see Annex Q: Deployment stage monitoring of
     high-risk AI models for key considerations);


                                                                                    127 of 284
    ● Obtain prior approval from the FAISA to sell or otherwise share the weights of
      any Tier 3 model, including to other Tier 3 AIMDs;85

    ● Promptly respond to law enforcement inquiries made via the FAISA in
      connection with any incidents that may be related to AI systems developed or
      deployed by the Tier 3 AIMD;86 and

    ● Put in place emergency procedures allowing the AIMD to rapidly shut down
      model deployments in response to law enforcement requests, FAISA directives,
      or indications of dangerous behaviors or capabilities detected during AI training
      runs or deployments.

4.1.3.4.4 Tier 4: AI models above the controlled threshold

An AI model above the controlled threshold is a Tier 4 model. Under this RADA
safeguards framework, Tier 4 models cannot be trained under any conditions. For
clarity, this restriction should apply to academic, industrial, and government entities
(see 4.3).

Tier 4 models are considered too high-risk to develop under the current AI paradigm
due to loss of control risk (Introduction, 0.2.2). Additionally, we expect that prohibiting
AI training beyond the controlled threshold may moderate race dynamics between all
AI developers. In particular, it will weaken the feedback loop between large-scaled AI




85 In general, an AIMD should not share the weights of a Tier 3 model with any organization that is not

also a Tier 3 AIMD. Given the potential for unrecoverable harm caused by such a leak (Introduction,
0.5.1.1), there should be significant consequences if a Tier 3 model is leaked, released under open
access, or otherwise shared with any organization that is not a Tier 3 AIMD. Leaks and hacks could be
grounds for revocation of a Tier 3 AIMD’s training license, while intentional or negligent release could be
grounds for criminal sanctions including jail time for the individuals responsible (see 4.2).

86 In particular, if an AI incident occurs in a given jurisdiction, law enforcement in the jurisdiction should

be able to contact the FAISA with a description of the incident. From this description, the FAISA should
be able to identify to law enforcement the end-customer who used the associated AI system, and the
AIMD who trained and/or deployed the AI system. Law enforcement may include, for example, the FBI,
a state cybercrime squad, local police, state District Attorney's offices, or federal Assistant U.S.
Attorney's offices.


                                                                                                    128 of 284
training runs and AI hardware development, limiting the rate at which a compute
overhang [146] develops after these controls are implemented [229].87

The FAISA should adjust the restricted threshold that defines Tier 4 over time. Many of
the requirements of Tier 3 (see 4.1.3.4.3) are intended to aggregate evidence,
from across multiple AI models and developers, that AI systems just below the
controlled threshold are safe. Once the FAISA has accumulated enough evidence for
safety, it should raise the restricted threshold to permit further scaling.

But it is also possible that improved fine-tuning techniques, or other evidence that AI
systems just below the restricted threshold are exhibiting dangerous capabilities or
propensities, will require the FAISA to lower the controlled threshold. If this occurs, the
FAISA might lower the controlled threshold in such a way that an existing, planned, or
in-training AI model that fell below the previous controlled threshold (and therefore
under Tier 3, see 4.1.3.4.3), now falls above the new restricted threshold (and therefore
under Tier 4). If this occurs, the model or training run should be grandfathered as Tier 3
by default, but the FAISA should be empowered to classify such models as Tier 4 on an
emergency individual basis, thereby prohibiting their further training. Any models that
are trained before these RADA safeguards come into force could also be
grandfathered in under the same conditions.

4.1.3.5 General provisions for all licensed entities

Under this RADA safeguards framework, additional general requirements would apply
across the three types of licensed entities that operate parts of the AI model training
stack: licensed DCIPs (see 4.1.3.2.2, Tier 2), AIHOs (see 4.1.3.3.2, Tier 2), and AIMDs
(see 4.1.3.4.3, Tier 3). While we believe the requirements in this section should be
considered core components of strong RADA safeguards, we expect them to require
frequent updates in response to new technical developments. The FAISA should also
be able to designate which tiers and entities they apply to.

Risk governance. Licensed DCIPs, AIHOs, and AIMDs should implement
organizational safeguards for advanced AI risk management including clear internal
accountability for potential catastrophic AI risks. This would include appointing a Chief
Risk Officer (CRO), a senior executive responsible for advanced AI risk management. It


87 A compute overhang refers to the regime in which AI model scaling is not limited by compute

availability. Frontier labs such as OpenAI have raised the concern that a compute overhang could lead to
rapid and unpredictable jumps in AI capabilities, which RADA safeguards like a Tier 4 controlled
threshold could partially mitigate [6].


                                                                                             129 of 284
would also include setting up an internal audit team [230] which would assess the
effectiveness of the entity’s advanced AI risk management practices and report any
shortcomings to its Board of Directors or equivalent body. Licensed entities could also
form a risk committee which would oversee the entity’s risk management practices.
Finally, licensed entities would implement a risk management framework (e.g., 3LoD
[231]) to assign and coordinate different risk management roles and responsibilities.

Outside and insider threat countermeasures. Licensed DCIPs, AIHOs, and AIMDs
should adhere to stringent cyber, operational, and physical security safeguards that
mirror those required in the civilian nuclear industry [232]. The primary goal of these
safeguards is to introduce as much friction as possible to unauthorized access or
exfiltration of model weights by attackers, including nation-state attackers
(Introduction, 0.5.1.5). The licensed entities would have these security measures
audited regularly by third parties, which could include red teaming and penetration
testing by both private sector security firms and the IC. In the event of significant
security deficiencies, the FAISA could revoke the deficient entity’s license, forbidding it
from training, supporting, or hosting Tier 3 models.

Should model weights be leaked or stolen, a thorough investigation would be
warranted, which could involve U.S. intelligence agencies and counterintelligence
efforts, depending on the nature of the leak. If a Tier 3 model is leaked, the FAISA
could revoke the licenses of the involved organizations, forbidding them from training,
supporting, or hosting Tier 3 models. Depending on the nature and severity of the
leak, the revocation may be permanent (see 4.2).

Model containment measures. Licensed DCIPs, AIHOs, and AIMDs would be
mandated to uphold stringent model containment safeguards. This could encompass
emergency shutdown procedures and information-gapping measures to ensure that
models do not have access to security-sensitive data sources (Annex N, N.4). It could
also include ensuring “kill switch” oversight from humans that are firewalled from
contact with the model’s outputs, “dead man switch” protocols that would pause
training in the absence of approval by a risk committee, or other monitoring systems
designed to notice when a model has breached containment (Annex O, O.5) [233].

AI safety and security training. Licensed DCIPs, AIHOs, and AIMDs would ensure that
their employees undergo regular AI safety and security training. The training would not
only cover safety measures but also educate employees about their rights, especially
concerning whistleblowing (see below). It should explicitly educate employees about
risks from weaponization and loss of control (Introduction, 0.2.1 and 0.2.2), and could
be bolstered by programs from LOE2, 2.2.


                                                                                  130 of 284
Whistleblower protections. Employees of licensed AIMDs, AIHOs, or DCIPs who
identify potential risks or dangers in a model based on reasonable belief, could be
protected by law. All employees could be made aware of these protections during
mandatory training sessions. Whistleblowers who point out the need for a new AI
evaluation, which an AIMD could be neglecting, could explicitly be protected.

Whistleblowers who uncover significant issues could receive substantial rewards, carved
out as a percentage of fines levied onto the licensed entity. The intent of these rewards
is to replace lost earnings in the event that the whistleblower’s career is impacted by
their actions.

A whistleblower’s identity should be kept confidential, though the FAISA may weigh
the value of anonymity against the value of their evidence in the event that a
whistleblower’s direct testimony is needed to bring criminal charges to a licensed entity
(see 4.2.2) [234].

Incident reporting. Licensed DCIPs, AIHOs, and AIMDs would report any major AI-
related incidents that have caused or risked causing harm or property damage above a
certain threshold to the FAISA (Annex Q, Q.1). The FAISA would then decide on the
necessary action. If a whistleblower reports a major incident before their employer
does, the latter should face penalties and a potential suspension of their license (see
4.2).

4.1.4 Publication controls

We recommend that the Congress direct the FAISA to commission an in-depth expert
study to investigate possible regimes for legal publication controls on specific AI
capabilities research. As part of this study, the FAISA could consult experts from
academia, industry, and the broader AI safety community including federal AI research
Centers (LOE3, 3.1.1 and 3.1.2).

Publication controls on research related to improvements in training algorithms are
particularly important, since these improvements reduce the effectiveness of compute
controls and export controls [86,235,236] (Introduction, 0.5.1.6 and 0.5.3.2). Any work
that increases training data efficiency, reduces TOPS cost per increment of training loss,
leads to improved scaling laws, or otherwise makes it easier to scale AI systems’
performance would fall under this category.




                                                                                131 of 284
Certain research areas that could make AI capability emergence more unpredictable
may also need to be controlled. This includes research related to recursive self-
improvement (RSI) in particular, for example a model being re-trained or fine-tuned on
its own outputs [237]. Improvements in long-term planning and general reasoning are
also areas of potential concern, since advances in understanding in these areas could
quickly lead to large unpredictable jumps in AI capabilities. This could also have
implications for the I&W and contingency planning workstreams in LOE2, 2.3 and 2.4.

Controls could include review and compliance frameworks applied during the
publication process, as well as more stringent controls on publishing research that
involves or applies to Tier 3 AI models or individuals who have worked or currently
work with such models. A key challenge for such controls is that breakthrough research
in AI capabilities is sometimes published by independent researchers outside frontier
labs. Recent examples include FlashAttention, which increased the scalability of in-
context memory for large language models (LLMs) [28]; Auto-GPT, which allows an LLM
to assign sub-tasks to copies of itself; and direct preference optimization (DPO), a
recent improvement over the RLHF alignment technique [238].

Finally, in making these recommendations, the FAISA should balance the risks
associated with publication against the need to keep the United States attractive as a
hub of advanced AI research (Introduction, 0.4.2). Measures including simplified entry
and immigration of foreign AI researchers to the United States (LOE1, 1.5.5) could
contribute to this objective.




                                                                               132 of 284
4.2 Legislative environment

Advanced AI may introduce catastrophic risks that are not addressed by the current
legislative environment (Introduction, 0.5.4.1). We recommend that the Congress
address this gap through a new legislative framework that directly associates escalating
risks from AI with escalating statutory safeguards. This framework would include three
components:

    ● Civil liability for actions that introduce or exacerbate recoverable catastrophic
      risks;88

    ● Criminal liability for actions that attempt to subvert the FAISA’s authority in a way
      that may introduce recoverable or unrecoverable catastrophic risks; and

    ● Emergency executive powers to address rapidly developing situations in which
      unrecoverable catastrophic risks are likely to materialize without swift U.S.
      government intervention.

We outline our proposed framework in more detail below.

4.2.1 Civil liability

Under this proposed framework, all individuals and entities involved in the AI supply
chain would owe a legally enshrined duty of care to ensure that their AI systems do not
introduce risk from loss of control and cannot be weaponized by third parties.

The obligations attached to this duty of care would include:

    ● Ensuring AI systems do not inadvertently harm innocent parties;

    ● Preventing cutting-edge AI from infiltrating third-party systems without
      permission;



88 A recoverable catastrophic risk has a worst-case impact that does not lead to irreversible, global-

scale harm. Civil and criminal liability may therefore be adequate to address these severe but
recoverable incidents. An unrecoverable catastrophic risk, by contrast, could in the worst-case
irreparably damage national security, or human welfare globally. In the latter case the threat of post-hoc
litigation may be meaningless, and would represent an insufficient disincentive to reckless activity. See
the Glossary of terms for our full definitions of recoverable and unrecoverable catastrophic risk.


                                                                                                133 of 284
   ● Safeguarding the unique algorithmic configurations of advanced AI (particularly
     model weights) from public exposure or theft (Introduction, 0.5.1.5); and

   ● Maintaining stringent security measures against unauthorized use of advanced
     AI, AI hardware, or data center infrastructure, which would involve actively
     identifying potential misuse, monitoring for such misuse, and taking swift action
     if any unauthorized access or misuse is detected.

If multiple parties are found in breach of these responsibilities concerning the same AI
system or related equipment, they could share the responsibility for any ensuing
damages or harms. Individuals could be allowed to pursue legal action for damages
exceeding a substantial monetary threshold (for example, $100 million) resulting from
such breaches. Claims less than this monetary threshold would not be addressed by
this framework. The idea is to clearly target catastrophic risks posed by the technology,
which could require an approach distinct from smaller scale AI incidents [239].

Certain violations, like failing to obtain necessary AI licenses from the FAISA or
violating licensing terms, could automatically constitute negligence. In situations where
damages above the monetary threshold are claimed due to a violation of the
established duty of care, the violating entity could be held directly accountable for all
physical, property, and financial damages resulting from events tied to such a violation.
In such cases, strict liability could apply, so plaintiffs would not be required to establish
the specific cause of the accident in order to be compensated. This is essential to
incentivize AI model developers to proactively anticipate large-scale harms that may be
associated with their development and deployment activities (Introduction, 0.5.1.1).
Strict liability may also incentivize insurance providers to increase premiums for
customers they assess to be engaged in development activities that could lead to
advanced models with the potential to cause damages above the monetary threshold.

Strict liability could only apply to cases in which significant damages occur, however, in
order to avoid stifling industry by imposing liability for smaller, non-catastrophic harms
(Introduction, 0.4.2). Making strict liability conditional on a license violation also
mitigates the burden of frivolous litigation on regulated entities. Exemptions could also
be made for genuine accidents, provided they arise in spite of reasonable measures to
prevent them. Purely clerical or mathematical errors could fall under these exemptions,
but errors in legal or technical judgments related to duty-of-care obligations would not.
Finally, the fact that a product or service is free, collaborative, open-source, or open-
access would not serve as a defense against any liabilities arising under this framework.




                                                                                   134 of 284
In addition to strict liability, joint and several liability could also apply to incidents
causing harms above the monetary threshold. This is in order to resolve what would
otherwise be an ambiguous diffusion of responsibility among AIHOs, AIHDs, DCIPs,
and AIMDs for high-impact incidents.89

Finally, there could exist a safe harbor from strict liability for regulatory tiers designated
by the FAISA. For example, the FAISA could determine that only Tier 2 AIHDs, AIHOs,
and DCIPs, and Tier 3 AIMDs and above are subject to strict liability provisions. This
would equip the FAISA to avoid a circumstance in which a low-risk model happens to
be used as a non-critical component of a system that causes damages above the
monetary threshold. Without a safe harbor, strict liability might otherwise apply to the
entity that trained the low-risk model, even though it did not meaningfully contribute
to causing the damages.90

Safe harbor provisions might also serve as an incentive for entities to comply with
regulatory requirements. If registering as a Tier 3 AIMD offers the AIMD a safe harbor
from strict liability, the AIMD may be more likely to register. In practice, an objective of
this framework is to ensure that strict liability applies only to the very small group of
individuals and AI models engaged in the highest-risk AI development and
deployment activities.

4.2.2 Criminal liability

A criminal liability framework for AI is essential. The magnitude of the risks posed by
reckless advanced AI development and deployment practices necessitates

89 That is, if a high-impact incident occurs, it may be unclear whether responsibility should rest with the

AIMD who created the system, the AIHO or DCIP who may have supplied computing resources to the
AIMD without adequate safeguards, or individual decision-makers within each entity. Joint and several
liability allows an injured party to sue any one responsible party for entire damages relating to an
incident, and places the responsibility on all parties to subsequently allocate the portion of the entire
damages paid by each.

90 An important technical consideration that motivates safe harbor provisions for strict liability has to do

with the amount of effort required by the user or developer of a system to do significant damage. Low-
capability AI systems require effortful and deliberate engineering to cause significant harm. In these
cases, it makes sense to hold individuals who deliberately weaponize these systems liable for these
harms. However, as AI systems become more capable, the systems themselves begin to drive larger
portions of the risk: an AI system capable of autonomously executing a catastrophic cyberattack may
require little more than a prompt from a user to cause significant damage, for example. In the latter case,
the model developer plays a critical role in causing damages, and should bear legal responsibility for
them.


                                                                                                  135 of 284
proportionate safeguards. These risks include threats to national security and public
safety borne by society at large (Introduction, 0.5.1.1 and 0.5.4.1).

Under this proposed legislative framework, the law would establish penalties for
dangerous behaviors on the part of individuals and entities involved in the AI supply
chain. These penalties would be designed to deter irresponsible and negligent
behavior and ensure accountability from these individuals and entities.

Any individual who commits a crime related to AI operations could be subjected to
fines, and distinct penalties could be designated for particular infractions. For example,
misdemeanors could include:

   ● Failure to accurately report high-performance AI hardware or qualifying data
     center infrastructure to the FAISA (see 4.1.3.1.2, 4.1.3.2.2, and 4.1.3.3.2);

   ● An AIMD misrepresenting its safety protocols or providing misleading
     information when pre-registering a training run that could plausibly lead to a
     model with dangerous capabilities or tendencies (for example, a Tier 2 or Tier 3
     training run; see 4.1.3.4.2 and 4.1.3.4.3);

   ● An AIMD, AIHO, AIHD, or DCIP operating above their respective licensing
     thresholds without a license; and

   ● An AIMD, AIHO, AIHD, or DCIP responding to information requests from the
     FAISA with misleading data.

Felonies could include:

   ● Disregarding an emergency order to halt AI development activities;

   ● Engaging in development activities that require a license following the rejection
     of a license application; and

   ● Breaching the conditions of a license, especially if these violations lead to
     heightened security risks or cause damages exceeding a significant monetary
     threshold (e.g., $100 million), or if the entity or its management have prior
     convictions under this liability framework.

Under this framework, entities could be barred from indirectly or directly covering fines
levied against their representatives. Compensation modifications to offset these fines


                                                                                 136 of 284
could also be prohibited. For non-profit entities or those where profits cannot dictate
the penalty magnitude, a court might impose increased fines.

For misdemeanors, an entity's licenses could be suspended for a moderate duration
(e.g., between 1 month and 1 year). During this period, all AI-related activities above
the licensing threshold could be prohibited. For felonies, all of the entity's licenses
could be revoked, and the entity would be ineligible for new licenses for a significant
period (e.g., five years). The entity could also be mandated to encrypt all its AI model
weights, and only authorized license holders would be able to decrypt them.
Additionally, the entity could be required to sell or destroy its AI hardware within 60
days. Crimes should be referred to the DOJ for prosecution.

We also recommend that the Congress investigate the constitutionality of fast-track
procedural options, with a view to including them in relevant legislation if appropriate.
This would give the government the option to respond to serious regulatory infractions
at the speed of relevance, and would provide additional deterrence for illegal
development and deployment practices.

4.2.3 Emergency powers

Even the possibility of criminal sanction may be insufficient to mitigate catastrophic
risks from AI in certain contexts. This is for three reasons. First, some organizations may
choose to take actions that create catastrophic AI risk without institutionally recognizing
that they are doing so. These organizations may not respond to the prospect of
criminal sanction associated with catastrophic outcomes, since they do not believe that
their activities will produce those outcomes (Introduction, 0.5.4.1).

Second, AGI development has winner-take-all characteristics. AI labs therefore face
powerful incentives to circumvent regulatory constraints and pursue clandestine AGI
research programs even if they consider these activities to be dangerous (Introduction,
0.5.3.1).

Finally, some of the risks from weaponization and loss of control associated with
advanced AI development may be WMD-like and unrecoverable, meaning that
effective risk mitigation strategies cannot be solely reactive (Introduction, 0.5.1.1).

New frontier AI models can be trained in a matter of weeks. Once trained, they can be
augmented in potentially dangerous ways with access to tools, through fine-tuning, or
via other techniques in a matter of hours. In order to prevent illicit and highly



                                                                                   137 of 284
dangerous AI development or deployment activities on the relevant timescales, we
believe the U.S. government will require new emergency powers.

We recommend an emergency powers framework consistent with the defense in depth
principle that we assess is required to safeguard against catastrophic national security
risks from advanced AI. In particular, we recommend that the Congress authorize the
President certain emergency powers under one of two conditions:

   ● If the President declares a national emergency due to a substantial national
     security threat stemming from advanced AI; or

   ● If the Administrator of the FAISA identifies a clear, immediate, and major
     national security threat from one or more advanced AI systems which cannot be
     curtailed by normal enforcement mechanisms.

In this latter case, we recommend that the FAISA Administrator’s determination be
made public in the Federal Register.

In the event that an AI developer is determined to engage in high-risk illicit
development or deployment, a rapid and technically informed response is essential.
Because of its depth of technical expertise and understanding of the AI ecosystem, the
FAISA – through its Administrator – could be empowered to suspend AI licenses
immediately, demand halts to certain AI-related activities, enforce safety measures,
secure or encrypt AI model weights, restrict access to specific AI systems, or impose a
general moratorium on AI research and development.

This would create a much-needed capacity for rapid and decisive response, and
provide the relevant U.S. government agencies with the time they may need to
understand the situation and context, before taking more decisive and long-term
actions.

Those who disagree with these emergency orders, either on technical or policy
grounds, should have a right to appeal. If they believe the order is unlawful or
unconstitutional, they would also be able appeal to the federal district court.

In the event of economic losses due to compliance with an emergency order, affected
parties should have a right to compensation from the government. Losses could be
gauged on tangible expenses, actual investments, and the value of destroyed property.




                                                                               138 of 284
4.3 Advanced AI in national security systems

Over time, we expect that advanced AI systems will be developed and deployed as
components of national security systems. This will include applications in defense,
intelligence, and other sensitive areas.

On the one hand, the national security imperative could necessitate less stringent
RADA safeguards than those in other areas, particularly with respect to weaponization
applications. On the other hand, there is no currently known method to reliably align
an AGI-level system, and misaligned systems that are capable enough are likely to
engage in extremely dangerous behavior by default (Introduction, 0.2.2 and 0.5.1.1).
As a result, the development or deployment of a sufficiently capable AI system by any
actor – including by national security agencies — could in and of itself create
substantial national security risk regardless of the system’s intended purpose.

The nature of and appropriate enforcement mechanisms for guardrails associated with
national security applications of advanced AI remain open questions. In practice, the IC
and DOD have internal oversight mechanisms, and the Inspector General and General
Counsel already implement relevant usage controls internal to these departments and
agencies. Similar mechanisms could be adapted to provide oversight for advanced AI
development and use in national security systems under a modified set of RADA
safeguards following a clear set of principles (LOE1, 1.3.2).

Another option could be to establish a “national security FAISA,” with the authority to
audit and intervene in the advanced AI activities of the national security agencies. This
latter option has significant challenges, including the potential to dilute the talent pool
available to other regulators, bifurcating institutional process knowledge on AI safety.

A related concern is that AI systems could be developed and deployed in national
security contexts in ways that could challenge long-standing U.S. Constitutional norms.
For example, deploying an AI system capable of superhuman persuasion could
undermine the democratic process, yet also be required to counter potential offensive
deployments of such systems by adversaries in the domestic information environment
(see Annex F: Persuasion and manipulation).

It will be essential for society to strike a balance between privacy and security in the
context of advanced AI, particularly when these systems are developed for use in
national security contexts. Consistent with other advanced technologies, there is a
need for an open, grounded, and technically informed dialogue between the



                                                                                  139 of 284
Congress, the Executive Branch, and the public on how advanced AI can best be used
to safeguard both national security and Constitutional freedoms.




                                                                          140 of 284
