LOE5: Enshrine AI safeguards in international law and
secure the AI supply chain




The rise of advanced AI and AGI has the potential to destabilize global security in ways
reminiscent of the introduction of nuclear weapons. Today, the United States leads in AI
innovation. However, allies, partners, and adversaries around the world are quickly
establishing their own AI scaling programs [240–242]. As advanced AI matures and the


                                                                               141 of 284
elements of the AI supply chain continue to proliferate (Introduction, 0.5.3.2), countries
may race to acquire the resources to build sovereign advanced AI capabilities. Unless
carefully managed, these competitive dynamics risk triggering an AGI arms race and
increase the likelihood of global- and WMD-scale fatal accidents, interstate conflict,
and escalation. These dynamics create the need for a carefully-calibrated U.S. strategy
that balances competing and sometimes contradictory unilateral and multilateral
objectives.

This LOE outlines near-term diplomatic actions and longer-term measures the U.S.
government could take to establish an effective AI safeguards regime in
international law while securing the AI supply chain. These actions include:

   ● Building a domestic and international consensus on potential catastrophic AI
     risks and necessary safeguards (see 5.2);

   ● Enshrining those safeguards in international law (see 5.3);

   ● Establishing an International AI Agency (IAIA) to monitor and verify adherence
     to those safeguards (see 5.4); and

   ● Establishing an AI Supply Chain Control Regime (ASCCR) with allies and
     partners to limit the proliferation of advanced AI technologies (see 5.5).

As a starting point to the above, the United States could secure the most time-critical
components of its own domestic AI supply chain (LOE1, 1.5).


5.1 Desired end state of this LOE

We believe a series of initiatives like the one described in this action plan should be
executed with a specific end state in mind as its ultimate objective. That end state may
be adjusted over time as options evolve. But at all times it should be clearly articulated.

The ideal end state of this action plan is a treaty to mitigate catastrophic AI risk from
weaponization and loss of control, enshrined in international law, and enforced globally
by United Nations mandate. This ideal treaty would:

   ● Enforce RADA safeguards on advanced AI training runs beyond a certain scale
     or capability similar to those recommended in LOE4, 4.1.3;




                                                                                 142 of 284
   ● Enforce reporting requirements on cloud providers above a certain scale,
     making those cloud providers responsible for monitoring the safety of advanced
     AI models trained on their platforms; and

   ● Enforce hardware-based tracking of AI-enabled chips along with international
     monitoring of AI chip usage, to minimize the risk that dangerous models are
     being trained clandestinely (Annex L.4).

This treaty structure is an attempt to balance (1) the increased risk of rogue AI
development due to proliferation of key components of the AI supply chain, against (2)
the risk that excessively centralizing those components could lead to the development
of competing unmonitored supply chains. A U.S.-led multilateral supply chain controls
regime (see 5.5) could probably be put in place more quickly and would achieve some
of these objectives. But the short-term safety benefits of a multilateral regime would be
at greater risk of being undermined by a competing supply chain [243] in the medium
term.

In the long term, it may be challenging to assure U.S. national security in the face of
catastrophic AI risks without an international solution. AI supply chains could become
too widely distributed, and AI models too easily proliferated, for unilateral action to
suffice even given the U.S. position in the present-day supply chain (Introduction,
0.5.3.2; Annex G, G.1). Even multilateral supply chain controls by a broad coalition of
U.S. allies may only buy time, though that time could prove invaluable to explore and
implement further options.


5.2 Build international consensus and partner capacity on
catastrophic AI risk reduction

There are credible reasons to believe that catastrophic AI risk from loss of control and
weaponization could become meaningful in the relatively near term (Introduction,
0.5.1.2). As a result, there is a need for rapid and decisive action to enshrine key AI
safeguards in international law, backed by credible enforcement mechanisms.

In leading such an effort, the United States will face the standard challenges that come
with international lawmaking. But these will be compounded by the high technical
complexity of AI risk, and the fact that nations do not yet have a shared understanding
of this domain. There is also the possibility that U.S. diplomatic action could
inadvertently alienate potential partners if it is not carefully calibrated given the




                                                                                 143 of 284
political sensitivities surrounding adjacent issues, such as ethical and responsible use of
AI.

This lack of shared understanding presents a significant risk while it persists, since it
increases the chance of an international AI race. But it also offers an opportunity for the
United States to lead and participate in international consensus-building, by supporting
other nations in developing and shaping that shared understanding. To take full
advantage of this opportunity, U.S. government personnel will themselves need to be
educated on catastrophic AI risks, their mechanisms, and their potential mitigations
(LOE2, 2.2.1). At the same time, the United States could launch educational programs
to support improving other countries’ awareness and mitigation capacity, particularly
concerning AGI alignment failure and resulting loss of control.

The goal of these efforts should be to build a broad international consensus on
behavior that risks global catastrophic impact from loss of control of AGI-level systems,
and should therefore face international sanction. We believe this consensus would be
extremely supportive in developing, negotiating, and enforcing an effective AI safety
and security treaty.

5.2.1 Coordinate domestic and international messaging and
capacity-building

The United States is already participating in early consensus-building on catastrophic AI
risk. The U.K. AI Safety Summit’s Bletchley Declaration [244], signed by the United
States, 27 other countries, and the European Union, refers to potential risks from
“intentional misuse or unintended issues of control relating to alignment with human
intent.” These are the sources of catastrophic AI risk we refer to, respectively, as
weaponization (Introduction, 0.2.1) and loss of control (Introduction, 0.2.2) in this
document.

While we recommend continuing to expand on these efforts, consensus building on
weaponization topics could be polarizing. Instead, focusing education and capacity-




                                                                                  144 of 284
building on technical cooperation to avoid loss-of-control scenarios, while maximizing
safety and security, could offer a more promising starting point.91

As part of these efforts, the United States will need to productively engage with two
key stakeholder groups. The first group will be policymakers and decisionmakers in
governments, particularly in national security roles. The second group will be the
technical advisors to those policymakers and decisionmakers. Because of the urgency
of the risk, domestic U.S. educational initiatives may need to operate in parallel with
international ones.

5.2.1.1 Policymaker education and outreach

In order to credibly brief international partners on catastrophic AI risk and the benefits
of cooperation on the issue, the U.S. government needs to increase its institutional
understanding of its key aspects. We recommend that, in tandem with outreach to its
international partners and in coordination with existing multilateral regimes, the U.S.
government rapidly educate its own policymakers on aspects of catastrophic AI risk
that touch on their areas of responsibility.

Part of the substance of this educational content is outlined in LOE2, 2.2. Additionally,
based on our direct experience briefing U.S. and international policymakers on this
issue, we believe these educational efforts should:

    ● Emphasize specific, concrete, and tangible scenarios relevant to AI risk and
      national security (see Annex C: Example AI alignment failure scenarios and [1]);

91 As a general guideline, we strongly recommend that diplomatic personnel engaged in these efforts

be briefed or trained in advanced AI topics as recommended in LOE2, 2.2.1. In particular, we have found
through our own outreach efforts that highlighting certain technical topics, such as the distinction
between outer alignment and inner alignment, can produce a positive diplomatic framing. Specifically,
the outer alignment problem refers to the challenge of defining goals which, if those goals were
faithfully pursued by an arbitrarily intelligent system, would not have catastrophic consequences. The
inner alignment problem refers to the challenge of ensuring that such a goal, once it is defined, will
actually be internalized by a trained AI system as its true goal. Both problems are currently unsolved. In
engagements so far, we have found that clearly explaining the distinction between these two problems
has been constructive from a diplomatic standpoint. The reason is that, because inner alignment is
unsolved, no actor can be assured that they will be able to control an AGI-level system even if they
develop and train the system themselves (Introduction, 0.2.2). Since such a system would be a danger to
everyone including its own developer, all actors are in principle incentivized to cooperate in preventing
the development of such a system for as long as inner alignment remains an open technical problem.
Diplomatic engagement can then begin on this basis, including potentially with adversaries. See the
Glossary of terms for full definitions of outer and inner alignment.


                                                                                               145 of 284
   ● Explain that the build-vs-use distinction that exists for nuclear weapons may not
     exist for sufficiently capable AI systems, meaning that simply building such a
     system, with no intent to deploy it, may in and of itself be a dangerous action
     (Introduction, 0.2.2); and

   ● Clarify that, because of this unusual risk profile, the international community may
     need to implement rules above and beyond those already in place for less-
     capable AI systems such as lethal autonomous weapons (LAWs).

Some immediate actions that the U.S. government could take to support education
and capacity-building for its international partners are:

   ● Through U.S. Missions globally, engage Heads of State and Heads of
     Government on AI safety, security, and catastrophic risk. Key objectives of these
     engagements should be to explain to partners what is happening in the field of
     frontier AI, to ask these governments to begin formulating their perspectives, to
     offer U.S.-provided foundational AI training, and to build support for an eventual
     international legal regime. The President or Secretary of State could also
     preview U.S. positions on advanced AI at the United Nations General Assembly.

   ● Initiate conversations on catastrophic AI risk in existing AI policy-focused forums
     such as the Global Partnership for AI, the United Nations Convention on Certain
     Conventional Weapons (CCW) Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) on LAWs,
     the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), and the
     AI Partnership for Defense.

   ● Design and implement foreign assistance programs for building partner capacity
     on AI safety. These programs could include robust foundational AI training, AI
     safety and security training and best practices, and support for domestic legal
     and regulatory frameworks needed to manage catastrophic AI risk. This could be
     done as part of the training and up-skilling efforts in LOE2, 2.2.

5.2.1.2 Technical education and outreach

A significant portion of the risk from advanced AI in the near term is associated with
development and deployment of frontier AI systems by and for national security and
defense applications (LOE4 4.3). National security and defense personnel in the United
States and abroad rely on their scientific communities for advice on the opportunities
and risks of advanced AI. This means effective outreach to scientific communities, AI


                                                                               146 of 284
researchers, and technical defense advisors around the world will be critical to ensure
that the national security establishments of stakeholder nations fully appreciate the
scope and nature of catastrophic risk from advanced AI systems, particularly as posed
by loss of control (Introduction, 0.2.2 and 0.5.1.1).

The United States should promote clear, open, honest, and secure discussion and
debate between AI researchers across national boundaries with a focus on catastrophic
AI risk and its potential mitigations. Because this risk class is global in scope,
stakeholder nations include the United States itself, its partners, and even its
adversaries.

Early efforts at international technical engagement by independent AI researchers are
already underway. Beginning in 2023, prominent Western academics, including
“godfather of deep learning” Geoff Hinton, began reaching out to the Chinese AI
research community with the aim of increasing its awareness of catastrophic risks from
advanced AI and AGI. Prominent AI researchers, practitioners, and public figures have
also signed the 2023 Center for AI Safety’s (CAIS) Statement on AI Risk [245], as have
several Chinese academics. We believe such outreach to be extremely valuable in
building the consensus on AGI risk that will ultimately establish diplomatic common
ground on this issue.

While the U.S. government should broadly support such efforts, it must be clear to all
stakeholders that these academics and organizations are acting independently out of
their own genuine concern. We expect U.S. outreach efforts to be most productive if
they are focused on promoting forums for expanded discussion on these topics, rather
than attempting to directly shape the substance of the debate.

Some immediate actions that the U.S. government could take to support education
and outreach to the international AI research community are:

   ● The U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations to initiate a process to establish an
     intergovernmental Commission on Frontier AI. The Commission's mandate
     could be to conduct research and draft a report to the Secretary General aimed
     at fostering consensus on catastrophic risk from loss of control due to AGI
     alignment failure. The Commission could draw inspiration from similar
     institutions, such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),
     which played an analogous role for scientific consensus-building on climate
     change. Although there is a risk that any research related to AI alignment may
     inadvertently contribute to accelerating AI capabilities and to the proliferation of
     more powerful AI systems, research aimed at accumulating evidence for the


                                                                                147 of 284
      difficulty of AI alignment (see Annex B: The full challenge of AGI alignment), or
      at demonstrating alignment failures in powerful non-frontier systems, may be
      less likely to present this risk. An international Commission on Frontier AI would
      offer an opportunity to promote international collaboration and clarify the
      shared incentives that exist between the U.S. and other countries in establishing
      an international regime for catastrophic AI risks [246].

   ● The Department of State’s Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental
     and Scientific Affairs’s (OES) Office of Science and Technology Cooperation
     (STC) to explore avenues for bilateral outreach with partners and international
     academic forums. These could include:

          ○ Encouraging academic venues such as NeurIPS [247] to host technical
            talks, workshops, or seminars on catastrophic AI risk;
          ○ Supporting carefully scoped collaborations, including temporary
            exchange programs, for AI safety and AGI alignment researchers between
            adversary, U.S., and Western researchers and institutions; and
          ○ Sponsoring technical training courses on AI safety and AI alignment to
            accelerate uptake of the core technical topics in these fields among the
            broader AI research community.

5.2.1.3 Other forms of capacity-building

Because catastrophic AI risk could manifest in the relatively near-term (Introduction,
0.5.1.2), we recommend that the United States adopt a collaborative stance to
discovery and truth-seeking with international stakeholders from an early stage. This is
a non-standard approach to international diplomacy. While consensus-building efforts
can proceed in parallel across partners and adversaries, any public announcement
should be sequenced with geopolitical sensitivities in mind.

Some early actions that the U.S. government could take to support capacity-building
across partner and adversary nations are:

   ● The Department of State, in coordination with the Defense Threat Reduction
     Agency (DTRA) and others, to establish programs to support catastrophic risk
     reduction from advanced AI. These could include destruction, dismantlement, or
     processing of unlicensed compute stockpiles and other supply chain
     components; red teaming of partners’ legal and regulatory frameworks;
     workshops and training on increasing safety and security at the individual and


                                                                                148 of 284
       institutional levels; material assistance; facilitating TTXs; and other forms of
       cooperative threat reduction.

5.2.2 Articulate and reinforce an of cial U.S. government position
on catastrophic AI risk

Early outreach and education may be able to proceed on the basis of collaborative
truth-seeking between the United States and international stakeholders. But later
consensus-building, and ultimately treaty negotiations, may be challenging without a
clearly articulated, official U.S. position on catastrophic AI risk [248]. Therefore the
United States should develop and promulgate such a position as soon as practicable.
Effective domestic AI regulation, as outlined in LOE1, 1.3 and LOE4, would also greatly
support the credibility of U.S. diplomatic efforts abroad by signaling willingness to
unilaterally improve the safety and security of its own AI industry.

To clarify the U.S. position, the Congress could issue a Sense of Congress on
catastrophic AI risk. The content and scope of a Sense of Congress would depend on
the degree of institutional understanding and internal assessment of this risk.

Both domestic controls and international safeguards will be time-consuming to
implement, though both may also need to be developed urgently. The United States
will need to navigate these constraints in order to effectively lead global coordinated
action on AI safety and security [249,250].


5.3 Enshrine AI safeguards in international law

The Department of State, in coordination with the relevant U.S. government leads,
could launch an international diplomatic campaign to enshrine AI safeguards in
international law. Ultimately the law could take the form of a binding treaty ratified by a
United Nations Security Council (UNSC) Resolution. If ratified by the U.S. Senate, an AI
safety treaty would become supreme law of the land and govern public and private
activities regarding advanced AI development.

To succeed, an international campaign to establish such a treaty could focus on
catastrophic AI risks and the corresponding safeguards. Political issues such as human
rights, AI ethics and responsible use, and general weaponization restrictions92 are


92 However it may be possible to obtain UNSC support for certain narrow weaponization restrictions,

such as a ban on training AI to develop biological weapons.


                                                                                            149 of 284
                                      fi
important for allied collective action, but could derail negotiations. The top priority in
negotiations could be to address catastrophic risks specifically stemming from unsafe
advanced AI development practices and potential loss of control due to AGI alignment
failure. Because these catastrophic risks have the potential to harm all parties, including
the developer of the AI itself, there may be a window for meaningful progress on this
narrowly scoped issue.

5.3.1 Treaty structure considerations

Among other challenges, an AI treaty would need to address the security dilemma that
frontier AI poses to participating nations. This dilemma has some precedent in the case
of nuclear and biological weapons development [248,251]. In particular, each
incremental advance in capabilities by a nation’s domestic AI industry improves that
nation’s security posture relative to its adversaries. But that improvement comes at the
expense of heightening global instability by increasing the general risk both of
intentional use of a weaponized AI system, and of AGI alignment failure and loss of
control of an AI system regardless of the intent of its developer (Introduction, 0.2.2).
This risk from loss of control has its closest parallel in research on biological agents,
which regularly escape containment despite having a clearly understood risk model
supported by decades of experience [252,253].

Nuclear arms control treaties such as the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT) have
historically had some success in mitigating a similar security dilemma [254]. These
treaties function by incrementally reducing participants’ stockpiles of warheads and
weapons systems, and confirming those reductions through mutual verification.
Verification mechanisms include requirements to declare nuclear facilities, disclose
statistics on nuclear supply chains, and allow inspections of key installations.

In the case of advanced AI, verification mechanisms for hardware could include
exposing elements of the semiconductor supply chain to inspection, cooperative threat
reduction in the form of verified destruction of AI hardware stocks, and on-chip
monitoring mechanisms (see Annex L, L.4). We discuss some of these approaches in
more detail, and address the dilemmas associated with algorithmic advances, in 5.4.1.

But advanced AI also poses a special challenge to traditional verification mechanisms.
In nuclear arms control, there is a division between reactor-grade (civilian) and
weapons-grade (military) nuclear material, defined by enrichment levels. That division
makes it feasible to apply controls to military applications without unduly hindering the
peaceful development of civilian nuclear technology. By contrast, an advanced AI
training data center may be inherently dual-use. It could in principle be used to train


                                                                                 150 of 284
safe and beneficial AI systems, or it could be used to train weaponized or high-risk AI
systems, without any external signal differentiating the two cases (Annex G, G.1).

This dual-use aspect of AI is especially challenging because current applications of
advanced AI are disproportionately beneficial. A traditional verification mechanism
therefore risks unduly curtailing beneficial innovation (Introduction, 0.4.2). On the other
hand, advanced AI training may be much more amenable to software-based
monitoring approaches, which have the potential to be more granular than traditional
verification (LOE1, 1.5.2). Both of these may need to be deployed in combination.

Finally, an AI safety treaty could be supported by an international organization to verify
compliance, set safety and security standards, and convene the global community of AI
researchers. We discuss this possibility in 5.4.

5.3.2 Preparation for a treaty

In setting the stage for international treaty negotiations, the United States could
coordinate closely with other nations that have mature AI industries. The 2023 U.K. AI
Summit [244] could offer a starting point for these engagements. We recommend that
the goal of these efforts be to establish comprehensive RADA safeguards to
minimize catastrophic risks from loss of control due to AGI alignment failure, and
aligning the international community on new international law or treaty requirements.

According to discussions with participants, the U.K. AI Summit made significant
progress building consensus in a number of key areas, including the importance of
implementing defense in depth by implementing overlapping sets of controls, and the
principle that, as an AI system becomes more powerful, the burden of safety
increasingly should fall on its developer. Some areas of contention remain, notably
regarding at which level of capability open-access AI systems stop being compatible
with continuing global safety and security (Introduction, 0.5.1.6). While some of these
areas may be resolved by further discussion among the parties, they also highlight the
ongoing need for technical collaboration and research into the risks, benefits, and
mitigations.

Similar summits, such as those planned in South Korea and France during 2024 [255],
could be used to secure additional commitments from frontier AI labs and their cloud
providers. Such commitments may serve an informal precedent-setting function for
fast-following labs outside the United States as the global AI supply chain proliferates
[256,257]. These summits could also be used as opportunities for countries to issue
joint declarations on their shared understanding of AI safety and security issues, similar


                                                                                  151 of 284
to the 2023 Bletchley Declaration [244], and consistent with the approach the United
States has taken to addressing global coordination challenges in the past [258,259].


5.4 Establish an international regulatory agency

If the United States is successful in spearheading an international legal regime for
catastrophic AI risk mitigation, the international community may need an agency with
the authorities to verify and monitor compliance with AI safety protocols, facilitate
technical AI safety cooperation, and establish and maintain safeguards. Although
supply chain controls (LOE1, 1.5) and domestic regulation (LOE4) may have a large
early impact, in the long-term global safety and security could require an international
agency with a mandate derived from international law. We will refer to this agency here
as the International AI Agency (IAIA).93

We expect an IAIA’s operating model to evolve, and recommend setting this
expectation clearly and explicitly. U.S. domestic regulatory efforts from LOE1, 1.4.1.2
and LOE4, 4.1.2 could inform this work. Similarly to early treaties on climate change,
the first iteration of an IAIA’s structure may not be the right one for the long term. On
the other hand, experience has shown that it may be possible to develop a multilateral
framework that effectively addresses a collective action problem, as long as the
participants are willing to iterate on the framework and agreement design. An explicit
iteration process could also let counterparties observe each others’ behavior over time,
adjust their commitments, and engage in confidence-building measures [215].

The history of nuclear nonproliferation [260] also shows that international efforts to
differentially control peaceful and military applications of dual-use technology can be
somewhat successful. For example, today 33 countries have safe nuclear power, while
only 9 have nuclear weapons [217]. Since an AI data center can be used just as easily to
develop safe AI systems as dangerous AI systems, differential controls may be more
challenging to apply in this domain than in the nuclear domain. But the tools to
monitor advanced AI may also be correspondingly more fine-grained and scalable,
since many of them could be implemented entirely in software.

Ideally, an IAIA monitoring mechanism should be able to detect individual defections
by its participants. This is important because the risk of an advance in AGI alignment
could incentivize individual participants to try to train their own self-aligned AGIs (see
5.2.1.4). We acknowledge that the challenges to such coordination and

93 It may also be possible to implement the functions of an IAIA that we recommend here through

existing mechanisms, channels, and forums.


                                                                                           152 of 284
implementation are very significant, and that no individual tool or approach can offer
comprehensive safety or security. This is a key reason we approach this problem
through the lens of defense in depth and recommend multiple, mutually supportive
control mechanisms (e.g., see 5.5).

5.4.1 Monitoring and veri cation

An international monitoring and verification regime could cover elements such as:

   ● Comprehensive safeguards agreements;

   ● Additional protocols;

   ● Regular, special, and ad hoc inspections;

   ● Containment and surveillance procedures;

   ● Material accountability;

   ● Access to AI scientists and researchers;

   ● Information sharing and reporting mechanisms; and

   ● Regular reports from the IAIA to the Secretary General.

With respect to specific supply chain components, the entity categories and tiers from
LOE4, 4.1.3 (AIMDs, AIHOs, DCIPs, and AIHDs) could serve as a template for an initial
RADA safeguards framework for an IAIA. As with domestic RADA safeguards,
international safeguards should take into account AI capability measures in addition to
raw compute, though compute will likely remain an important locus of control (Annex
G, G.2). Accordingly, regulatory oversight may need to extend into semiconductor
manufacturing inputs to address the risk that independent AI hardware supply chains
could arise to circumvent safety controls.

One of an IAIA’s key responsibilities could be to monitor use and development of AI
hardware around the world. Key challenges will include ensuring that countries which
are not yet IAIA members do not accumulate public or private pools of compute
sufficient to support the training of AI models that pose catastrophic risks (Introduction,
0.5.3.2). This might be achieved in part via coordinated export controls of compute



                                                                                  153 of 284
                    fi
hardware to non-IAIA member countries through a Compute Suppliers Group (CSG)
analogous to the Nuclear Suppliers Group for nuclear materials [225,261,262].

An additional challenge would be for an IAIA to ensure that models that pose
catastrophic risks are not trained within or outside its member countries as algorithmic
improvements allow more capable models to be trained with less hardware [262], and
as hardware efficiencies increase (Introduction, 0.5.3.2). This risk could be mitigated
among member countries by having the IAIA adjust its licensing thresholds over time
to ensure that they continue to apply to any entities capable of marshaling dangerous
quantities of compute, similar to the FAISA (LOE4, 4.1.2.4) and consistent with RADA
safeguards principles (LOE1, 1.3.2). In addition to a CSG, an IAIA could also coordinate
with a U.S.-led international AI supply chain controls regime (see 5.5) to ensure that
international purchases of AI chips are restricted to members of the controls regime.
This could become essential as algorithmic breakthroughs may allow smaller compute
pools to be leveraged to build more dangerous systems (Annex G, G.3).

Perhaps the most important requirement to safeguard long-term global safety and
security from AI will be hardware-enabled mechanisms that can allow verification and
control of how compute hardware is being used, supported by robust chip registry
programs (Annex L, L.4) [148,155,213,224]. This would involve exercising tight control
on the semiconductor supply chain to ensure that any chips that enter the global
supply are equipped with on-chip monitoring hardware, as well as preventing
alternative compute supply chains from forming around the world. Such technical
efforts could be undertaken in coordination with a multilateral supply chain controls
regime if one exists (see 5.5).

5.4.2 Standard-setting

An IAIA could set authoritative international standards for advanced AI training runs
and deployments. These could include standards for security, model containment
measures, evaluations for advanced AI models, and other key areas informed by
entities such as the NIST U.S. AISI (LOE3, 3.2).

5.4.3 Convening researchers

Finally, an IAIA should create a regular forum to convene international researchers to
advance the state of the art in AI monitoring and standard-setting. This could take the
form of a quarterly or biannual conference of top researchers in these respective areas,
and of financing grants for research teams working in these domains.



                                                                               154 of 284
Another possibility could be to establish an international research facility dedicated to
AI safety and security research. Such a facility could form an early point of agreement in
treaty negotiations and even be established before a large-scale monitoring regime, as
an extension of earlier educational and outreach programs (see 5.2.1.2). Such a facility
could support joint investigation of AI safety and security questions that could confirm
or disprove aspects of AI risk and inform negotiations.


5.5 Allied multilateral initiatives to manage the AI supply
chain

A functioning international AI safeguards regime (see 5.4) represents an ideal outcome
(see 5.1). But as part of a defense-in-depth strategy, the United States could also work
in parallel with its allies and partners to establish a multilateral framework of AI supply
chain controls, such as through the Wassenaar Arrangement [263]. Not only would this
increase U.S. and allied leverage for broader international negotiations, but it could
also be used to reinforce many of the monitoring functions of the IAIA if successfully
implemented. Additionally, such a multilateral framework would function as a stopgap
and failsafe, in case an attempt to work through international bodies proceeds too
slowly or is otherwise unsuccessful.

In the worst case, an independent multilateral supply chain controls framework, led by
the United States, may be sufficient on its own to secure the inputs needed to train
frontier AI systems for some time. But we expect that, in the longer term, independent
AI supply chains [243] will emerge and ultimately undermine even an otherwise
effective multilateral system.

A multilateral AI controls framework could have three goals:

   ● Ensure that critical elements of the supply chain for advanced AI, particularly
     compute94 and its inputs, remain localized to U.S. and allied jurisdictions;

   ● Ensure that access to AI cloud compute is controlled through a regulatory
     mechanism similar to that proposed in LOE4, 4.1.3 including RADA safeguards
     implemented in U.S. and allied jurisdictions; and




94 Meaning GPUs, TPUs, and other AI accelerator chips.



                                                                                  155 of 284
   ● Provide a path for foreign entities to obtain access to AI cloud compute clusters
     in U.S. and allied jurisdictions, provided they do so subject to the regulatory
     mechanism (e.g., LOE1, 1.5.2).

5.5.1 Strategic considerations

The most promising points of regulatory leverage in any supply chain are those that
involve assets that have been built or acquired at high capital cost. By this criterion, AI
hardware, data centers, and the other the elements listed above offer valid loci of
control over the advanced AI supply chain (Introduction, 0.5.3.2).

But other AI supply chain components, while they may be crucial as inputs, are less
amenable to regulatory oversight because they do not meet this criterion. Textual
training data, for example, is available online at relatively low cost [264,265]. And
frontier AI models themselves can be copied and transferred at no cost once created,
even though they require a high capital cost to train. As a result, controls on open-
source data or on the sharing of open-access AI models are unlikely to be effective,
though data controls scoped to specific model training runs could be beneficial (Annex
N, N.4). Controls at the application level are also unlikely to be worth the cost, unless
implemented as KYC requirements on a model developer’s end users (Annex P, P.2).

5.5.2 Multilateral partnerships

The supply chain for AI hardware is at the root of any realistic long-term mechanism for
advanced AI control and nonproliferation (LOE1, 1.5.3; Annex G: Primer on AI and
compute). It may be vital to maintain close coordination with international partners on
this issue in order to ensure controls remain robust in the face of changing future
conditions.

The United States manufactures a significant fraction of the inputs to AI hardware
production domestically, so it holds a significant position in this supply chain. The
United States can strengthen this advantage by coordinating with international partners
in the AI chip supply chain. Many key AI inputs are manufactured in allied and partner
countries [243,257]. Below is a list of countries that could be inaugural members of an
ASCCR, along with the significance of each. [266,267]




                                                                                   156 of 284
Table 4. Potential inaugural members of an ASCCR and the components of the AI supply chain
over which they exert the most influence.


            Country                        AI supply chain control approaches

Netherlands                  Semiconductor tooling export controls

Japan                        Semiconductor tooling export controls, technology transfer
                             controls, foreign national visa screening

Germany                      Technology transfer controls, foreign national visa screening

Taiwan                       Semiconductor tooling export controls

United Kingdom               Technology transfer controls, foreign national visa screening

South Korea                  Semiconductor tooling export controls

France                       Technology transfer controls, foreign national visa screening

Australia                    Technology transfer controls, foreign national visa screening

Israel                       Semiconductor tooling export controls

Singapore                    Semiconductor tooling export controls

United Arab Emirates [241]   Technology transfer controls, foreign national visa screening


The exact conditions for safety compliance are fluid and have many dependencies, but
could initially be based on terms such as those in Annex I: Voluntary Charter for
responsible AI, or on the RADA safeguards framework outlined in LOE4, 4.1.3.

An ASCCR could prioritize the development of technologies, standards, and policies
for on-chip governance (Annex L, L.4). Because robust on-chip governance capabilities
could take several years to develop and be put into production at scale, the United
States could consider urgently investing in the development of on-chip governance
technologies prior to the formation of the ASCCR [148]. This could be done through
federal AI research Centers such as in LOE3, 3.1.


5.6 Open challenges

In this action plan, we have attempted to balance considerations of risk and innovation
while addressing as many challenges as we can reasonably anticipate. But several open
challenges remain that we feel we have not directly addressed.



                                                                                     157 of 284
One major difficulty in the international setting is that AI-capable nations are
incentivized to escalate development of AI-enabled national security systems. This
incentive is preserved even if both sides fully agree on the risk of loss of control from
the development and deployment of AGI-level systems. Because the exact capability
level at which these risks begin to manifest is unknown, parties may be motivated to
make incremental improvements to gain an edge in national security. Certain forms of
mutual verification could begin to address this challenge, but they may require
unprecedented levels of access, high trust between the parties, and a broad-based
consensus on the underlying risk.

Reliable verification of compliance with AI risk mitigations is also an open problem. In
the face of attempts at obfuscation by a resourced entity, it is challenging to verify that
the entity is not training a high-capability advanced AI model. Certain approaches like
on-chip verification are promising and could be implemented on timelines of a few
months for domestic verification schemes. But this increases to several years in
contexts involving international verification [148].

The impact of algorithmic improvements on the effectiveness of supply chain controls
is another consideration in the medium and long term (Introduction, 0.5.3.2). As AI
algorithms continue to improve, more AI capabilities become available for less total
compute. Depending on how far this trend progresses, it could ultimately become
impractical to mitigate advanced AI proliferation through compute concentrations at
all. Approaches to limit the pace of algorithmic improvements could address this issue
(LOE4, 4.1.4), though there are significant downsides to placing broad-based controls
on this kind of research.




                                                                                  158 of 284
Conclusion

AI is a technology fundamentally unlike any other. It holds vast potential to elevate
human well-being, but could also be deliberately weaponized or exhibit accidental
failures that have catastrophic consequences. Our recommendations focus on
mitigating the most unrecoverable catastrophic risks advanced AI poses (Introduction,
0.5.1.1) while preserving its potential for positive impact (Introduction, 0.4.2). Current
and near-term risks from advanced AI include weaponization for applications which
could include bioweapon design, advanced manufacturing, large-scale human
persuasion, and cyber warfare (Introduction, 0.2.1). Future risks include loss of control
of high-capability AI systems (Introduction, 0.2.2). Frontier AI labs have publicly
suggested that such dangerously capable systems could be developed in the near
future, and possibly within the next five years (Introduction, 0.5.1.2). Both categories of
risk have the potential, in the worst case, for unrecoverable catastrophic impact on
human welfare.

Several underlying factors drive and exacerbate these risks. They include:

   ● Worst case outcomes from weaponization and loss of control are plausible [19]
     and may have unrecoverable catastrophic impacts (Introduction, 0.5.1.1);

   ● The timescale and degree of risk from loss of control are highly uncertain and
     the subject of ongoing technical debate (Introduction, 0.5.1.2 and 0.5.1.3);

   ● The world’s most advanced AI labs have publicly acknowledged that they lack
     the safety and security measures they need to secure their systems against
     catastrophic risks (Introduction, 0.5.1.4 and 0.5.1.5);

   ● Researchers at these labs have publicly acknowledged that fundamental
     advances in AI alignment will be required to prevent loss of control over
     advanced AI systems that may be developed in the near term [84,85];
   ● The supply chain for advanced AI is challenging to secure by reactive policy
     measures (Introduction, 0.5.3.2);

   ● There is no known way to comprehensively audit the full range of dangerous
     capabilities and propensities of advanced AI models, and these models can
     therefore harbor latent dangerous capabilities that may only be discovered or
     elicited after they are deployed or released as open-access software
     (Introduction, 0.5.1.6; LOE3, 3.2.1);


                                                                                  159 of 284
   ● AI technology is advancing faster than reactive policy and legislative processes
     and may be accelerating, which could cause policy measures to quickly become
     outdated (Introduction, 0.5.2.1);

   ● Information and discussion on the topic of AI is often highly polarized in public
     spheres (Introduction, 0.5.2.2);

   ● A lack of domestic controls could reduce the effectiveness of U.S.-led
     international coordination on risk reduction (LOE5, 5.2.2); and

   ● Excessive domestic controls could damage U.S. innovation and competitiveness
     in AI (Introduction, 0.4.2).

Given the degree of AI-related risks and the multifaceted nature of the factors that
contribute to them, no single safeguard may be adequate. Instead, we propose a
mitigation strategy based on defense in depth, in which multiple lines of effort are
deployed simultaneously to deliver different impacts across different timescales. These
lines of effort include:

   ● Establishing an interim domestic regime of responsible AI development and
     adoption (RADA) safeguards for U.S. frontier labs overseen by an interagency
     task force, along with controls on the AI supply chain (LOE1);

   ● Establishing legally enshrined AI safeguards, including an AI regulatory
     agency, criminal and civil liability framework, and emergency Presidential
     powers (LOE4); and

   ● Establishing and implementing AI safeguards in international law, along with
     multilateral controls on the supply chain for advanced AI (LOE5).

In addition, we recommend two supporting lines of effort:

   ● Building capability and capacity for advanced AI and AGI preparedness and
     response (LOE2); and

   ● Increasing national capacity for technical AI safety research and standards
     development (LOE3).




                                                                               160 of 284
These LOEs are complementary, mutually reinforcing, and directly address the factors
underlying AI-related weaponization and loss of control risks. The task force established
under LOE1, 1.4 would serve as a testing ground for safety and security measures that
could apply to future domestic and international regulatory regimes (LOE4, 4.1.3 and
LOE5, 5.3). A mandated set of RADA safeguards (LOE1, 1.3.2) would give the task
force the leverage necessary to ensure the active participation of frontier AI labs as it
pilots its oversight operations.

Supporting lines of effort ensure that the legal and regulatory RADA safeguards
introduced under LOE4 are enforced in a technically informed manner (LOE2, 2.2;
LOE3, 3.2) that is both responsive to the requirements of contingency planners (LOE2,
2.4), and flexible in the face of novel technical developments (LOE1, 1.2; LOE2, 2.3).
And the international RADA safeguards overseen under LOE5, 5.4 would benefit from
the lessons learned from implementing LOE1 and LOE4 domestically.

Some measures proposed in this action plan are without precedent. LOE1, 1.3 calls for
pivotal executive actions; LOE4, 4.2 calls for the Congress to pass a landmark bill that
would set a new framework for national AI governance; and LOE5, 5.3 calls for a
formally ratified treaty to be negotiated with allies, partners, and other stakeholders.
But it is increasingly clear that the United States should address frontier AI research
with the same seriousness as previous paradigm-shifting technological breakthroughs
with the potential to introduce WMD-like threats to global safety. In the past, this has
entailed significant regulatory and legal interventions, rooted in coordination between
technical and governmental experts.

In the face of these challenges, bold action is required for the United States to address
the current, near-term, and future catastrophic risks that AI poses while maximizing its
benefits, and successfully navigate what may be the single greatest test of technology
governance in the nation’s history.




                                                                                161 of 284
Funding disclosure

This publication was produced for review by the United States Department of State. It
was prepared by Gladstone February 26, 2024 and the contents are the responsibility
of the authors. The authors’ views expressed in this publication do not reflect the views
of the United States Department of State or the United States Government.

Gladstone AI is a for-profit company funded entirely from its own revenues. Neither
Gladstone AI, nor any of the authors as individuals, have received investments or
donations from any external institutions. Neither Gladstone AI, nor any of the authors
as individuals, have financial ties to any of the non-U.S. government entities described
in this document, or to any of their employees, investors, donors, or affiliates.




                                                                                162 of 284
Acknowledgements

We thank the following members of the Gladstone AI project team for contributing
their invaluable subject-matter expertise, edits, and advice to this action plan.

   ● Ben Isaacoff, Project Lead. AI & ML Scientist Manager, General Motors.

   ● Jon Askonas, History Team Lead. Senior Fellow at The Foundation for American
     Innovation.

   ● Alexander Falbo-Wild, History Team Associate. History PhD Student at Temple
     University.

   ● Caroline Pitman, History Team Associate. Special Assistant at the Center on
     Global Energy Policy.

The following organizations and individuals generously offered their time, comments,
feedback, or insights in reviewing or shaping crucial aspects of this document. We
greatly appreciate their considerable contributions.

   ● Apollo Research. London, U.K.-based AI evaluations developer, focused on
     deception and misalignment. (apolloresearch.ai)
        ○ Marius Hobbhahn, Co-founder and Director
        ○ Lee Sharkey, Co-founder and Chief Strategy Officer

   ● Center for AI Policy (CAIP). DC-based nonprofit specializing in AI safety
     legislation. (aipolicy.us)
        ○ Thomas Larsen, Founder and Executive Director
        ○ Jason Green-Lowe, Legislative Director
        ○ Akash Wasil, AI Governance and Policy

   ● Center for a New American Security (CNAS). DC-based national security think
     tank. (cnas.org)
        ○ Tim Fist, Research Fellow
        ○ Caleb Withers, Research Assistant




                                                                              163 of 284
● Center for AI Safety (CAIS). San Francisco-based research and field-building
  nonprofit focused on reducing societal-scale risks from AI. (safe.ai)
     ○ Dan Hendrycks, Co-founder and Executive Director
     ○ Bri Treece, Chief Operating Officer

● Centre for International Governance Innovation (CIGI). Waterloo, Canada-
  based independent think tank on global governance. (cigionline.org)
     ○ Duncan Cass-Beggs, Executive Director, Global AI Risk Initiative

● Centre for the Governance of AI (GovAI). Oxford, U.K.-based research and
  development nonprofit focused on long-term AI governance. (governance.ai)
     ○ Ben Garfinkel, Director
     ○ Guive Assadi, Research Scholar
     ○ Alan Chan, Research Scholar
     ○ Noemi Dreksler, Research Fellow
     ○ Fynn Heide, Research Scholar
     ○ Lennart Heim, Research Fellow
     ○ Jonas Schuett, Research Fellow
     ○ Elizabeth Seger, Research Scholar
     ○ Robert Trager, International Governance Lead

● Conjecture. London, U.K.-based developer of scalable AI alignment solutions.
  (conjecture.dev)
     ○ Connor Leahy, Founder and Chief Executive Officer
     ○ Andrea Miotti, AI Policy and Governance
     ○ Chris Scammell, Chief Operating Officer
     ○ Rachel Stockton, Chief of Staff to the CEO

● Epoch. Remote (U.S. and Europe) nonprofit working on forecasting
  developments and trends in advanced AI. (epochai.org)
     ○ Jaime Sevilla Molina, Co-founder and Director
     ○ Ben Cottier, Staff Researcher

● Machine Intelligence Research Institute (MIRI). Berkeley-based nonprofit
  research institute focused on technical AI alignment. (intelligence.org)
     ○ Nate Soares, Executive Director
     ○ Malo Bourgon, Chief Operating Officer




                                                                        164 of 284
● Mila – Québec Arti cial Intelligence Institute. Montreal, Canada-based
  research nonprofit; one of the founding centers of deep learning. (mila.quebec)
     ○ Yoshua Bengio, Founder and Scientific Director

● Model Evaluation & Threat Research (METR; formerly ARC Evals). Berkeley-
  based nonprofit developing AI evaluations for self-replication. (metr.org)
     ○ Chris Painter, Member of Technical Staff

● RAND Corporation. DC-based nonprofit think tank, research institute, and
  public sector consulting form. (rand.org)
     ○ Jeff Alstott, Senior Information Scientist
     ○ Ella Guest, AI Policy Fellow

● Rethink Priorities. Remote (U.S. and Europe) nonprofit working on research and
  implementation for altruistic causes. (rethinkpriorities.org)
     ○ Michael Aird, Senior Research Manager, AI Governance and Strategy
     ○ Joe O’Brien, Research Assistant, AI Governance and Strategy
     ○ Abi Olvera, Affiliate, AI Governance and Strategy

● SaferAI. Paris, France-based developer of infrastructure for auditing advanced
  AI systems. (safer-ai.org)
      ○ Siméon Campos, Founder and Chief Executive Officer

● University of California, Berkeley. Berkeley-based public research university.
  (berkeley.edu)
     ○ Hany Farid, Professor, School of Information
     ○ Chris Hoofnagle, Faculty Director, Berkeley Center for Law & Technology
     ○ Andrew Reddie, Associate Research Professor, Goldman School of Public
         Policy
     ○ Jonathan Stray, Senior Scientist, Center for Human-Compatible AI

● Independent reviewers and contributors. The following individuals did not
  have institutional affiliations at the time of their reviews or contributions.
     ○ Fletcher Heisler, cybersecurity researcher

● Anonymous reviewers and contributors. The following reviewers and
  contributors are anonymous.
     ○ e5b63409d76da1d33c49e44cf55f8b7ebd52baa6e624a0b53dcd9a
         04377ce7dec5cabed82c831c10dc10bab942def414eb904f320129
         be7f41102611283aa02a



                                                                           165 of 284
  fi
          We also thank technical, policy, and leadership teams from OpenAI, Google
          DeepMind, Anthropic, and Meta for their helpful and constructive discussions over
          the course of this project.

          In addition, we are grateful to selected officials from the governments of Canada, the
          United Kingdom, and the United States for conversations that shaped or informed
          elements of this action plan. These include individuals from the following offices,
          departments, and agencies. For the avoidance of doubt, this action plan does not
          necessarily reflect the views, policies, or positions of any of these entities.

          Canada

             ● Of ce of the Prime Minister

             ● Of ce of the Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Canada

             ● Of ce of the Minister of National Defence

             ● Of ce of the Minister of Innovation, Science, and Industry

             ● Of ce of the Minister of Foreign Affairs

             ● Privy Council Of ce

             ● Department of National Defence

             ● Global Affairs Canada

             ● Public Safety Canada

             ● House of Commons
                 ○ Multiple Members of Parliament (MPs) and staffers

          United Kingdom

             ● Cabinet Of ce

             ● Department for Science, Innovation & Technology




                                                                                         166 of 284
fi
fi
fi
fi
fi
     fi
             fi
     ● Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Of ce
          ○ Counter Proliferation and Arms Control Centre
          ○ Directorate for Defence and International Security

     ● Ministry of Defence
          ○ Defence AI Centre
          ○ Defence AI & Autonomy Policy Unit
          ○ Defence Science & Technology Laboratory (DSTL)
          ○ Secretary of State’s Office of Net Assessment and Challenge (SONAC)

United States

     ● Executive Of ce of the President
          ○ Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
                ■ Office of the Federal Chief Information Officer (CIO)
          ○ Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP)
                ■ National Security Division

     ● Director of National Intelligence
          ○ Office of the Director (ODNI)
                 ■ Policy and Capabilities (P&C)

     ● National Science Foundation

     ● Securities and Exchange Commission
          ○ Office of the Chair
          ○ Division of Examinations
                 ■ Event & Emerging Risks Team (EERT)
          ○ Division of Trading and Markets
          ○ Strategic Hub for Innovation and Financial Technology (FinHub)

     ● Department of Commerce
         ○ National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
               ■ Information Technology Laboratory (ITL)




                                                                             167 of 284
fi
                                   fi
● Department of Defense
    ○ Office of the Secretary
          ■ Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Office (OSD CDAO)
    ○ Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
          ■ Information Innovation Office (I2O)
    ○ Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA)
          ■ Technology and Long-Range Analysis Office (TLA)
    ○ Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA)
          ■ Research and Development Directorate
    ○ Department of the Air Force
          ■ Chief Data and AI Office (DAF CDAO)
    ○ Office of the Under Secretary for Policy
          ■ Assistant Secretary of Defense for Strategy, Plans and Capabilities
             (ASD SPC)
                 ● Force Development and Emerging Capabilities Office
                    (FDEC)
          ■ Nuclear and Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Policy
             (NCWMDP)
    ○ Office of the Under Secretary for Research & Engineering (OUSD (R&E))
    ○ Joint Chiefs of Staff
          ■ Strategy, Plans, and Policy (J5)
          ■ Command, Control, Communications and Computer Systems (J6)

● Department of Energy
    ○ National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA)
          ■ Counterterrorism and Counterproliferation Office (NA-80)
    ○ Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL)
          ■ Center for Applied Scientific Computing
    ○ Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL)
    ○ Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)
          ■ Center for AI Security Research (CAISER)
    ○ Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL)

● Department of Justice
    ○ Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
          ■ Weapons of Mass Destruction Directorate (WMDD)
                 ● Emerging Threats and Technologies Unit
                 ● Nuclear and Radiological Countermeasures Unit




                                                                        168 of 284
   ● Department of Homeland Security
       ○ Office of the Secretary
       ○ Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office (CWMD)
       ○ Office of Intelligence and Analysis (I&A)
       ○ Office of Strategy, Policy, and Plans (OSPP)
       ○ Science and Technology Directorate (S&T)

   ● Department of State
       ○ Office of the Secretary
             ■ Office of the Special Envoy for Critical and Emerging Technology
                (S/TECH)
       ○ Bureau of Intelligence and Research (INR)
       ○ Office of Policy Coordination (PC)
       ○ Under Secretary for Arms Control and International Security
             ■ Bureau of Arms Control, Verification and Compliance (AVC)
                    ● Office of Emerging Security Challenges (ESC)
             ■ Bureau of International Security and Nonproliferation (ISN)
                    ● Office of Cooperative Threat Reduction (CTR)
                    ● Office of Congressional and Public Affairs (CPA)
                    ● Office of Critical Technology Protection (CTP)
                    ● Office of the Nonproliferation and Disarmament Fund (NDF)
       ○ Under Secretary for Economic Growth, Energy, and the Environment
             ■ Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs (EB)
                    ● Division for Trade Policy and Negotiations (TPN)
                           ○ Office of International Intellectual Property
                              Enforcement (IPE)
       ○ Under Secretary for Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs
             ■ Global Engagement Center (GEC)

   ● United States Congress
        ○ Multiple Representatives and staffers

Finally, the above acknowledgements are not intended to imply that the listed
organizations or individuals actively endorse this document in whole or in part. All
errors and omissions are our own.

                                     ·      ·      ·




                                                                                169 of 284
