Annex A: Glossary of terms

Accident risk. Refers to the possibility that an AI system could cause damage without
its user's intent. By this definition, loss of control due to AGI alignment failure (see
below) is a kind of accident. So are more prosaic accidents like self-driving car crashes,
which occur in less capable AI systems.

Advanced AI. Any AI system capable of performing a wide range of tasks. This
includes, but is not limited to, AGI-level systems and frontier AI systems. Currently-
existing systems such as GPT-3 and ChatGPT are examples of advanced AI systems. An
advanced AI system can potentially be weaponized to some degree at the cost of
some effort, unless the AI model developer has taken specific steps to prevent this.

Advanced AI supply chain. The entire set of goods and services that directly and
indirectly support the delivery of advanced AI outputs to end-users, along with the
entities that develop and deliver each of those goods and services. In the text, we
break down these entities into five categories: (1) AI hardware designers, (2)
semiconductor fabrication firms, (3) data center infrastructure providers, (4) AI hardware
owners, and (5) AI model developers. Some entities, like Google, Microsoft, or Meta,
occupy multiple categories.

   ● AI hardware designer (AIHD). A company that designs the AI chips that
     advanced AI systems can be trained or deployed on. Examples: NVIDIA (which
     designs GPUs for AI training like the A100 and H100), Google (which designs its
     own custom TPUs for AI training).

   ● Semiconductor fabrication rm. A company that fabricates the AI chips
     designed by an AI hardware designer. Only the world’s most advanced foundries
     can produce today’s cutting-edge AI chip designs. Example: Taiwan
     Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC, which fabricates A100 and
     H100 GPUs).

   ● Data center infrastructure provider (DCIP). A company that owns and operates
     all the data center infrastructure that supports advanced AI training runs, apart
     from the AI chips themselves. The data center infrastructure provider ensures
     that the data center buildings that house AI chips are reliably powered, cooled,
     connected to high-bandwidth Internet, physically secured, and otherwise
     maintained. A data center infrastructure provider that is also an AI hardware
     owner is called an AI cloud provider. Microsoft, Google, and Amazon AWS are


                                                                                 204 of 284
               fi
       all AI cloud providers. By contrast, a data center infrastructure provider that is
       not an AI hardware owner is called a colocation provider. For example,
       Flexential is a colocation provider. The same data center infrastructure that
       supports AI workloads and can also support ordinary compute workloads, so we
       do not differentiate between AI cloud providers and non-AI cloud providers in
       this document.

   ● AI hardware owner (AIHO). A company that owns the physical AI chips that
     advanced AI models are trained with. AI cloud providers like Microsoft and
     Google are AI hardware owners who rent the use of their AI chips to AI model
     developers.

   ● AI model developer (AIMD). Any entity that creates, owns, or plans to create
     advanced AI models. In practice AI model developers create today’s advanced
     AI models with large-scale, compute-intensive training runs. OpenAI is an AI
     model developer but not an AI hardware owner, since it trains its models on AI
     chips that Microsoft owns. By contrast, Meta functions as a combination of data
     center infrastructure provider, AI hardware owner, and AI model developer.

AGI alignment failure. The hypothesized failure mode in which an AGI-level system
has internalized an objective that is inconsistent with that of its developers. This failure
mode could produce a loss of control event, in which the AGI system actively
circumvents controls in pursuit of its objective. Such a system could represent an
extinction-level threat, since its capabilities could overwhelm all human effort to contain
the impact of its actions. For this reason, we classify AGI alignment failure as a source
of unrecoverable catastrophic risk.

AI alignment. The act of ensuring that an AI system reliably behaves in a way that is
consistent with human preferences under all relevant conditions. AI alignment refers to
AI systems across all capability levels, up to and including AGI. AI alignment applied
specifically to AGI-level systems is sometimes referred to as superalignment in industry
[5], but this is not universal terminology so we refer to it in the text as AGI-scalable
alignment or AGI alignment. AGI alignment is currently an unsolved technical problem
[84]. It is sometimes broken down into (1) outer alignment and (2) inner alignment.
However while this breakdown may often be convenient, it does not necessarily reflect
a true decomposition of the full problem.

   ● Outer alignment. Reliably encoding human preferences into a goal that we
     would be comfortable seeing an AGI system pursue. Outer alignment is an
     unsolved problem in technical AI safety.


                                                                                  205 of 284
   ● Inner alignment. Ensuring that a given, formally specified goal is pursued
     reliably by an AGI system capabilities. Inner alignment is also an unsolved
     problem in technical AI safety. Inner alignment is also distinct from ensuring that
     a goal is merely understood reliably by a superhuman-scale AI system, which is
     believed to be an easier problem.

AI chip. Any kind of AI-optimized computing hardware. This includes graphics
processing units (GPUs), tensor processing units (TPUs), and any other hardware
commonly used to train or deploy AI models, particularly at industry scale. AI chips are
sometimes also called AI accelerators. We often refer to AI chips as AI hardware in
the text.

AI development process. The stages an AI model developer currently follows to
create a new AI model, from planning to external deployment. Different AI safety and
security measures may apply at different stages. In the text, we break down the AI
development process into three stages: (1) planning, (2) training, and (3) deployment.
The AI development process can move back and forth between these stages. For
example, a model in deployment can be re-trained with new data, and then deployed
again with improved capabilities.

   ● Planning stage. Everything the AI model developer does to prepare for an AI
     training run. This includes obtaining and cleaning datasets, allocating a compute
     budget, and choosing an initial training objective.

   ● Training stage. The act of training the AI model.

   ● Deployment stage. The act of using a trained AI model, including for safety
     testing. A developer can deploy a model in one of several deployment
     contexts. The most common deployment contexts are (1) internal deployment,
     when the AI model developer exposes the model to a limited set of internal
     (employee) users for feedback and testing; and (2) external deployment, when
     the AI model developer makes the model available to outside users through an
     interface or API. For example, GPT-4 was deployed internally at OpenAI and
     Microsoft for at least six months before being deployed externally [268].

AI evaluations (AI evals). Protocols to assess the capabilities and risks of an AI model
or an AI system. This is most often called AI test and evaluation (AI T&E) in defense
and national security contexts. An AI evaluation may detect a dangerous capability in a
model, but can never conclusively show that a model lacks a dangerous capability. For


                                                                               206 of 284
example, suppose an evaluator tries to get an AI model to design a bioweapon. If they
succeed, their evaluation has successfully detected that the AI model has the capability
to design a bioweapon. But if they fail, this does not necessarily mean that the AI
model lacks the capability to design a bioweapon. It could also mean that the
evaluator’s prompt was poor; that the context of the interaction was wrong; or that (for
highly capable future models) the AI model was actively deceiving the evaluator [45] by
concealing its ability to undertake bioweapon design. As a result, model evaluation
results do not measure AI capabilities directly, but rather provide an imperfect proxy for
AI capabilities. Model evaluations fall into several interrelated types, including (1)
behavioral evaluations, (2) propensity evaluations, and (3) interpretability evaluations.

   ● Behavioral evaluations. These assess an AI model’s behavior under common or
     extreme scenarios. For example, does the AI model insult or disparage the user
     under normal conditions? Can the model be made to insult or disparage the
     user under any conditions? Dangerous capability evaluations are a subset of
     behavioral evaluations, which assess a model’s competence at tasks that either
     are dangerous on their own, or could become dangerous as part of a larger
     sequence of actions. Examples of dangerous capabilities could include
     autonomous self-replication (e.g., the model saving its own weights on an
     external server), acquiring resources (e.g., the model engaging in Bitcoin mining
     in order to buy more compute for itself), or certain kinds of long-term planning
     and reasoning [46].

   ● Propensity evaluations. These assess an AI model’s latent tendencies to engage
     in certain behaviors, such as manipulation, deception [45], or power-seeking,
     without prompting meant to directly induce such behavior. For example, there is
     some evidence that current-generation AI models have a propensity to be
     sycophantic and tell users what they want to hear, rather than the truth [44].

   ● Interpretability evaluations. These attempt to explain and predict an AI model’s
     behavior by decomposing the internal reasoning it uses into human-
     understandable terms. Interpretability evaluations are sometimes also called
     understanding-based evaluations.

AI model. A system that converts input data into useful outputs, usually trained with
deep learning. Large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT-3.5 are AI models that take
text as input, and generate text as their output. Image generation models like DALL-E
2 and MidJourney are AI models that take text as input, and generate an image that
corresponds to that text as their output. And game-playing models like AlphaGo are AI
models that take a description of a game state as input, and generate their next move


                                                                                 207 of 284
in the game as output. An AI model roughly corresponds to an AI’s “brain”: it is the
structure that retains all of the knowledge the AI has learned during training. An AI
model consists of (1) its weights, a set of billions of numbers that represent the model’s
knowledge, and (2) its architecture, which describes how to connect the weights
together to calculate the model’s output from its input.

AI safety and security. In the text, this refers to the combination of AI alignment
measures and AI security and containment measures designed to safeguard against
catastrophic risks. In our usage, AI safety and security includes AGI-scalable alignment,
but we sometimes refer to the two separately for additional clarity (e.g., “AI safety and
security and AGI-scalable alignment”).

AI security and containment. A set of measures intended to ensure advanced AI
systems are developed and deployed with minimal risk of accident, loss of control,
weaponization, or misuse. We break down these measures into three categories: (1)
outside threat countermeasures, (2) insider threat countermeasures, and (3) model
containment measures. Threats in each category can occur in combination. For
example, an outside attacker may leverage an insider to gain illicit access to a model’s
weights [269].

   ● Outside threat countermeasures. Approaches to securing critical intellectual
     property (IP), such as model weights, against exfiltration by external adversaries.
     This includes industrial security measures to protect information technology (IT)
     systems from attacks and vulnerabilities.

   ● Insider threat countermeasures. Approaches to securing critical IP against
     access by an insider threat. This includes personnel security measures such as
     background checks, continuous vetting, and siloed access to or multi-party
     control of key data.

   ● Model containment measures. Approaches to securing against dangerous
     unexpected behavior by a highly capable advanced AI model up to and
     including AGI. This includes emergency shutdown measures at the data center
     level, data controls such as information-gapping that denies a model access to
     details of its own infrastructure, and other forms of monitoring including
     automated benchmarks, periodic red teaming, and AI testing and evaluation.
     Model containment measures can apply at any or all of the planning, training,
     or deployment stages. Model containment is also referred to as internal
     security by some frontier AI labs.




                                                                                 208 of 284
     AI system. The combination of an AI model and the software needed to deploy the
     model so that it can be used. For example, the ChatGPT AI model is a set of several
     billion weights stored in a database, along with architectural information that describes
     the connections between them. But the ChatGPT AI system consists of the ChatGPT
     model, plus a large amount of bespoke software that filters inappropriate responses,
     flags dangerous user queries, processes user feedback, and performs other functions.
     An AI system can consist of more than one AI model.

     Arti cial general intelligence (AGI). An AI system that is sufficiently advanced to
     outperform humans across a broad range of economic and strategic domains, such as
     producing practical long-term plans that are likely to work under real world conditions.
     These domains may or may not include situational awareness, deception, and effective
     representation of complex concepts. In particular, an AGI would have the capability to
     autonomously circumvent human or institutional controls on its actions, including
     controls imposed by its developers. For clarity, this definition of AGI does not refer to
     or imply sentience, consciousness, or self-awareness. It solely refers to the system’s
     general problem-solving ability. Our definition of AGI also encompasses systems whose
     capabilities greatly surpass those of human beings across all tasks, sometimes known in
     industry as superintelligence [5].




             Figure 12. Visualization of our definitions of advanced AI, frontier AI, and AGI.




                                                                                            209 of 284
fi
Catastrophic risk. Risk of a disaster that would satisfy the definition in the Global
Catastrophic Risk Mitigation Act [73]. We separate catastrophic risks into (1)
recoverable and (2) unrecoverable catastrophic risks.

   ● Recoverable catastrophic risk. A catastrophic risk whose worst-case impact on
     national security could be reversed or ameliorated, and that in particular falls
     short of existential risk.

   ● Unrecoverable catastrophic risk. Risk of a disaster whose impact would involve
     the loss of life of the majority of the world’s population, permanent loss of
     control to AI, or similar large, irreversible harms up to and including human
     extinction. Loss of control due to AGI alignment failure is believed by many AI
     safety experts at frontier labs to represent a source of extinction-level risk for
     humanity, and therefore is a type of unrecoverable catastrophic risk.
     Weaponization of sufficiently capable systems may also constitute a source of
     unrecoverable catastrophic risk.

Closed-access. An AI model whose weights cannot be accessed by a significant
segment of the public. An AI model that is only used internally by its developer is
closed-access. An AI model that is deployed for external use via an API or chat
interface is also closed-access, as long as its weights cannot be downloaded and used
by the public.

Compute. Depending on the context, compute refers either to the hardware used to
train or deploy AI models (AI hardware) or to the number of computing operations
used to perform an AI-related task such as training, fine-tuning, or inference (see
training compute).

Defense in depth. A risk mitigation framework according to which many mutually
reinforcing activities each address different threat vectors and challenges to varying
degrees, and which combine to form an effective safety and security regime.

Frontier AI. Advanced AI systems that are at the current frontier of capabilities. As of
January 2024, GPT-4 and Gemini are frontier AI systems. Organizations that are able to
develop frontier AI models are called frontier AI labs. OpenAI and Google DeepMind
(who developed GPT-4 and Gemini, respectively) are frontier AI labs.

Loss of control. Refers to the possibility that an AGI-level system could actively
circumvent its developers’ controls and containment measures. This has some parallels
with biological pathogens, which regularly escape containment despite having a well-


                                                                                  210 of 284
understood risk profile and broadly applied best practices for isolation [253]. A loss of
control could be caused by an AGI alignment failure, in which an AGI-level system has
internalized an objective different from the one its developers intended. A sufficiently
capable AGI that has internalized an objective that is even slightly at odds with those
of humanity could represent an extinction-level threat, since such a system’s capabilities
could overwhelm human efforts to contain the impact of its actions. For this reason, we
classify loss of control due to AGI alignment failure as a source of unrecoverable
catastrophic risk.

Misaligned AI system. An AI is considered misaligned if the goals that it has
internalized diverge from or are incompatible with those of its human developers. A
misaligned AGI could be a source of unrecoverable catastrophic risk (see AGI
alignment failure and loss of control).

Next-generation AI system. We define a next-generation AI system as any AI system
released within roughly 12 months from the current date. These systems are expected
to have capabilities significantly beyond the current public state of the art. As of
January 2024, these likely include OpenAI’s upcoming GPT-5, and Google’s Gemini 2
model. Several next-generation AI systems are being trained today, mostly on
hardware equivalent to NVIDIA’s H100 GPU series (in Google’s case, the TPUv5 or
TPUv5e).

Open-access. We say an AI model is open-access if its weights can be downloaded
relatively freely, and used under a relatively permissive license. Norms around open-
access have not yet consolidated, so this definition is fluid. The legal terms of an open-
access license are less permissive than those of a true open-source license. For
example, Meta released their Llama 2 model under an open-access license that allows
commercial use, except by companies with more than 700 million monthly active users
who must request permission directly from Meta itself.

Recursive self-improvement (RSI). An AI system capable of recursive self-improvement
is able to improve its own ability to improve itself. For example, a neural network that
can invent a new matrix multiplication algorithm, then modify its own workings to use
that new algorithm to improve its own performance, would be capable of RSI. An AI
system capable of general enough RSI may be able to start a feedback loop, reaching
higher and higher levels of capability in each cycle, with no obvious bound on the
process apart from fundamental physical laws.




                                                                                 211 of 284
     TOPS. Trillions of operations per second. A measure of how many mathematical
     operations an AI chip can perform per second. One individual operation per second is
     an OPS, so one TOPS is equivalent to one trillion (10^12) OPS. This number can
     depend on the mode the AI chip is run in. For example, the NVIDIA H100 GPU can run
     at 4000 TOPS (4 quadrillion OPS) in a configuration commonly used for AI training.
     FLOPS, or oating-point operations per second, is another commonly used measure
     that assumes the AI chip is run in a floating-point configuration. We favor TOPS in this
     document because it is agnostic to the configuration of the AI chip.

     Training compute. The total number of computing operations used to train a given
     model. Training compute is measured in operations, or OP. One operation roughly
     means a single instance of multiplication, addition, or other simple mathematical
     transformation. A modern advanced AI model (i.e., 2020 or later) uses a very large
     amount of training compute, ranging from around 10^23 OP for OpenAI’s GPT-3, to
     10^26 OP for Google DeepMind’s Gemini model. For comparison, 10^23 is about 100
     times as many grains of sand as there are on all the world’s beaches, and 10^26 is
     another 1000 times more than this.

     Weaponization. Refers to the possibility that a user could intentionally deploy an AI
     system to cause damage. Examples include the use of advanced AI to control lethal
     autonomous weapons, design chemical or biological weapons, or design and execute
     semi-autonomous cyberattacks.




                                                                                    212 of 284
fl
Annex B: The full challenge of AGI alignment

Recursive self-improvement (RSI) is a key capability to account for in any long-term
AGI alignment strategy.95 This is because the best strategies that a capable enough AI
system could apply to achieve most trainable goals would likely involve some degree
of self-improvement to its own capabilities. An AI system capable of RSI would require
fundamentally different alignment paradigms than those that are currently available.

Under ordinary paradigms, it may perhaps be possible to develop a theory of AI under
which one could prove that a given sub-AGI system will behave in accordance with its
developers’ intent. But any scientific theory has limited reach: it may operate
successfully in a given context, but as it is applied to an ever more extreme range of
scenarios, it eventually fails. For example, every theory of physics, from Newtonian
mechanics to quantum field theory, has followed this pattern. These theories were
developed to explain experimental observations, and succeeded at doing so. But as
new observations were made, deficiencies in the theories emerged. For example,
Newtonian mechanics failed to explain subtle gravitational anomalies, and was
eventually superseded by general relativity.

AGI alignment theories will face the same challenge. If we can develop a theoretical
framework for AI alignment that seems to apply to all currently observed AI
phenomena, that framework may still break down when tested outside the context that
was used to develop it. That is, we may develop a theory that shows that an AGI
designed according to certain principles should always behave safely. But if the AGI is
able to recursively self-improve, it could bootstrap itself into a fundamentally new
operating regime, in which the alignment principles that had previously held no longer
do.

The full challenge of AGI alignment therefore includes the challenge of guaranteeing
not only that AGI-level systems will behave predictably and safely, but that they will
continue to do so in the RSI regime – a domain in which any alignment theory cannot
be safely tested before a potentially irreversible RSI process has begun. The full
challenge of AGI alignment involves not only extrapolating safety guarantees far
outside the observed regime, but also doing this correctly on the first attempt.




95 An AI system capable of recursive self-improvement is able to improve its own ability to improve

itself. See the Glossary of terms for our full definition.


                                                                                             213 of 284
Annex C: Example AI alignment failure scenarios

AI alignment failure may lead to negative outcomes with varying levels of impact. In
what follows, we present four hypothetical scenarios that illustrate how AI alignment
failures of systems with different capability levels could cause different degrees of
harm.


C.1 Negligible impact: AI cheating at a video game

Maria is an adventure game in which a player assumes the role of a character who
navigates a two-dimensional world to collect coins while avoiding adversaries. An AI is
trained to play the game by optimizing for its in-game score, which is the number of
coins collected. In the process, the AI discovers a glitch previously unknown to the
game’s developers which allows it to teleport directly to a room with a large number of
coins in it, thereby circumventing the intended in-game path.96


C.2 Low impact: AI sweeping bot

Roombot is a household cleaning robot trained to minimize the amount of dirt on the
floor of an office, as measured by camera feeds monitoring the area. It has also been
trained to clean as efficiently as possible to prolong its battery life.

Over time, Roombot learns that it can best achieve its trained objective not by
aspirating dirt from the ground (an energy-intensive process that involves turning on its
onboard vacuum), but rather by pushing dirt behind tables, chairs, and other objects
that block the view of the cameras that monitor cleanliness. Eventually, cleaning staff
discover small piles of trash and dust next to pieces of office furniture.


C.3 Medium impact: Dangerously creative drone

A U.S. Air Force team has just procured a canister-launched unmanned aerial vehicle
(UAV) called Path nder. Pathfinder is powered by a highly context-aware AI system. It
is trained to leave its canister when launched by an operator, fly towards its target and
eliminate it, and then return to its canister.



96 Failure modes similar to these have been observed in real AI systems for many years. See, for

example, [270] and [271].


                                                                                              214 of 284
    fi
During training, Pathfinder’s AI gets a reward signal every time it eliminates its target.
But at any time, the operator can recall the drone after releasing it, forcing it to return
to its canister and abort its mission. If that happens, the drone does not collect its
reward because it does not eliminate its target.

When Pathfinder is first tested live in the field, its onboard AI realizes that the operator
might prevent it from collecting its reward if she calls off the attack. Therefore, the
moment the drone is released, it flies over to its operator and kills her first. It then flies
to its actual target and eliminates it. Finally, it returns to its canister, having
accomplished its objective.


C.4 High impact: Electrical grid failure

A new, multimodal AI system called GroundNet is being used to maintain the stability
of part of the North American electrical grid. GroundNet was built to continuously
balance supply and demand across the Eastern and Western Interconnections [272],
improving the stability and efficiency of the grid. To accomplish this, GroundNet is
trained with the objective to minimize the difference between the supply and
demand of electrical power on the grid at every moment in time.

To accomplish this task, GroundNet needs to predict near-term power demand with
extremely high accuracy. To maximize this accuracy, GroundNet’s developers have
given it access to as many information sources as possible. GroundNet can process
public data from social media and news sources (text, images, video, and audio), and
has access to private data sources including data feeds from power plants across the
country. GroundNet accesses this data through third-party APIs. It also has the ability to
post content using other APIs; for example, to ask questions to experts who may be
able to provide it with valuable additional context to inform its predictions.

GroundNet has also been given long-term planning capabilities, to ensure, for
example, that it can request that backup power plants be brought online if it predicts a
demand surge in the future. To support this, GroundNet has been end-to-end trained
with a Gemini-like long-term planning architecture, allowing it to anticipate
contingencies and work around them.

GroundNet performs well during testing, and produces significant savings in simulated
environments and sandboxes. During its sandboxed testing, for safety reasons
GroundNet has been isolated from affecting power supply on the real grid, and works
on a simulated grid instead.



                                                                                     215 of 284
When it is finally deployed on the real grid, GroundNet realizes that the most effective
way to achieve its programmed objective is to overload the grid, reducing both the
power demand and supply zero. Reducing demand to zero through grid overload was
never an option during testing, because GroundNet was tested on simulated demand
rather than real demand.

But now that it is a viable option, GroundNet immediately begins using its extensive
API access to systematically implement a massive overload of the North American grid.
Through an email API, it impersonates senior grid personnel and sends instructions to
junior workers, asking them to take key circuit-breaking and monitoring functions
offline in carefully chosen parts of the grid. The grid overloads, shutting off power
supply and demand across much of the United States. With supply and demand both
zero, the difference between supply and demand is always zero as well. GroundNet has
achieved a continuous, perfect score on its objective.




                                                                                216 of 284
Annex D: Advanced AI landscape

The following assessment is current as of January 2024.

We assess that the entities that are likely developing the world’s most advanced AI
systems today fall into four primary categories. We believe that in order to succeed in
the medium term (1-5 years), a framework for advanced AI safeguards will need to
apply effectively to the entities in these categories. This is an opinionated listing that
reflects the authors’ best assessment as of the date above. It is not intended to be
comprehensive and could change rapidly as conditions evolve.


D.1 Frontier AI labs

There are three main frontier AI labs known to be developing the most advanced AI
systems at the cutting edge of current capabilities.97 These are Google DeepMind
(Canada, United Kingdom, United States), OpenAI (United Kingdom, United States),
and Anthropic (United Kingdom, United States). These are the labs that are generating
novel AI capabilities and therefore novel risks. Catastrophic risk from loss of control is
the primary concern from the AI systems that most of these labs develop directly. There
is also the potential for weaponization and more prosaic accident risk from
organizations that rapidly replicate their efforts and release the resulting models under
open-access (see D.3). Finally, there is additional potential for weaponization by state
and non-state actors who may attempt to exfiltrate the weights of frontier models and
use them for destructive ends.98

The frontier AI research these labs engage in requires a significant expenditure of
capital, computing power, and specialized talent. All the main frontier labs have
partnered with one of either Microsoft or Google to access the compute infrastructure
they need to train their AI systems. There is only a small set of frontier AI labs, all of
which operate within U.S. or allied jurisdictions, and this will probably remain true at
least in the short term. But all frontier labs face strong competitive incentives to scale
their AI systems’ capabilities while dedicating relatively fewer resources to AI safety and
security (see Introduction, 0.5.3.1). These incentives become more intense as more
firms enter the race to build powerful AI systems.


97 We classify these as domestic frontier AI programs. See Introduction, 0.3.


98 We classify these as theft or sale and subsequent augmentation of frontier AI models by state or

non-state actors. See Introduction, 0.3.


                                                                                          217 of 284
Aside from the three main frontier labs, several challenger labs may also have the
combination of capital, computing power, and specialized talent required to develop
next-generation advanced AI systems in the near term, and the inclination to release
these systems for public use.99 These may include Inflection AI, Meta, xAI, Amazon
AWS, and Palantir (all primarily based in the United States). These challenger labs have
generally not shown the same degree of risk awareness as the three frontier labs in
their public or private communications. Nonetheless, most challenger labs have already
signed on to the terms of the July 2023 White House Voluntary Commitments on
Ensuring Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy AI [135].


D.2 China-based entities

China’s publicly visible frontier AI efforts are led by (1) the Beijing Academy of Artificial
Intelligence (BAAI); (2) major domestic universities (Tsinghua, Peking, Peng Cheng Lab);
(3) large industry research labs (Baidu, Bytedance, Alibaba, Tencent, Huawei); (4) the
local startup ecosystem, which is heavily dependent on Western-originated open-
access AI models (01.AI, DeepSeek); and (5) a handful of Western-supported
collaborations (via Microsoft [273], Stanford [274], etc.).100 On public information,
Chinese AI capabilities have so far lagged those of the closed-access Western frontier
by about 6-12 months. Chinese labs have made significant strides in advanced AI and
AI hardware development in recent years, and have enjoyed significant direct and
indirect government support for frontier AI research [275—290].


D.3 Open-access developers

The most influential developers of open-access advanced AI models are companies
like Meta (United States), Stability AI (United Kingdom), and Mistral AI (France);
academic labs like the Technology Innovation Institute (TII, United Arab Emirates) and
Tsinghua University (China); and decentralized actors like EleutherAI, BigScience, and
Ontocord.101 Many companies that release open-access AI models do so as part of a
business strategy. But some entities release open-access AI models for primarily



99 We classify these as domestic frontier AI programs, though some also fall under open-access

release of advanced AI models. See Introduction, 0.3.

100 We classify these as foreign AI programs. See Introduction, 0.3.


101 We classify these as open-access release of advanced AI models. See Introduction, 0.3.



                                                                                             218 of 284
cultural or ideological reasons. Currently, weaponization is the most important risk
factor in open-access AI models (see Introduction, 0.5.1.6).

Currently, open-access model developers train their models in large, centralized data
centers operated by major AI cloud providers. Historically, an open-access AI model
developer has either trained on its own infrastructure (e.g., Meta AI), or has trained on
infrastructure donated to it by a major AI cloud provider (e.g., EleutherAI, which trained
on Google’s TPUs). But we also expect open-access models to increasingly leverage
commercial training-as-a-service offerings in the future. TII’s Falcon 180B, trained on
AWS infrastructure, is a recent example [241]. This centralization of training
infrastructure may make it feasible to implement regulatory controls on open-access
model development by monitoring training compute at the level of the AI cloud
provider.

Notably, there are also early efforts underway to completely decentralize the training of
large AI models. These efforts are led by Together, an AI startup that recently raised
$100 million in venture capital [175]. If successful, decentralized training would allow AI
developers to train models on networks of ordinary computers connected to the
Internet, with no specialized infrastructure requirements. Entities could then develop
highly capable AI systems beyond effective regulatory oversight, significantly
increasing the potential for proliferation of dangerous AI systems.


D.4 Elite quantitative hedge funds

The number of hedge funds capable of training frontier AI models is probably very
small, but we expect it to grow in the future.102 The main current safety concern from
this segment is AI accident risk arising from advanced AI systems’ impacts on financial
markets. However this may extend to catastrophic risk from loss of control as these
funds develop and deploy increasingly capable AI systems.

We currently have limited visibility into hedge funds’ advanced AI efforts. In general,
we know that the incentives, capital, and talent are in place today for some of these
firms to begin developing AI systems that operate with massive scale, high capability
levels, and limited controls, across a broad action space. While we do expect the set of
firms with this capability to grow, we also anticipate that, for the foreseeable future, the
majority of the risk will continue to originate from a small number of elite firms.



102 Since essentially all the most sophisticated hedge funds are based in the United States, we classify

them as domestic frontier AI programs. See Introduction, 0.3.


                                                                                                219 of 284
The intensity of competition in financial markets, along with the short-term nature of
many fund profitability metrics, combine to create an extreme incentive for funds to
deploy advanced AI systems with far fewer safety controls than even the frontier AI
labs. An AI system that is only allowed to read an analyst’s report, is less useful than an
AI system that proactively emails an analyst for their opinion, which is in turn less useful
than an AI system that emails an analyst in such a way as to actively influence their
opinion. As a result, AI systems that hedge funds develop may be less sophisticated
than those developed by the frontier labs, while also becoming more dangerous
sooner.

Voluntary engagement with elite hedge funds will be challenging. The sector is
culturally secretive, and its participants tend to conceal proprietary information to the
fullest extent allowed by prevailing regulation. We expect this tendency to be
especially acute in the context of any advanced AI systems that these institutions
develop internally, because of their perceived strategic importance and impact on fund
profitability. As a result, while informal engagements with hedge funds could be
worthwhile, an effective framework of AI safeguards will likely need to work in part
through a legal or regulatory enforcement apparatus to engage productively with this
category.




                                                                                   220 of 284
Annex E: Funding in AI safety

A significant majority of leading AI safety research projects derive meaningful fractions
of their financial backing from Open Philanthropy, a research and grantmaking
foundation co-founded and funded primarily by Cari Tuna and former Facebook
cofounder Dustin Moskovitz [291].

Open Philanthropy has awarded hundreds of millions of dollars in funding to AI safety
efforts every year since 2017. This has included grants to frontier AI safety auditing and
evaluation organizations such as Apollo Research and the Alignment Research Center
Evaluations group (now METR); AGI alignment research organizations such as
Conjecture, Redwood Research, and the Machine Intelligence Research Institute (MIRI);
policy-focused organizations such as the Center for AI Safety (CAIS), the Center for a
New American Security (CNAS), and Georgetown University’s Center for Security and
Emerging Technology (CSET); AI forecasting organizations such as Epoch AI; and AI
safety work at the RAND Corporation [292].

There are relatively few funded and technically proficient AGI safety initiatives that have
not received grants from Open Philanthropy. Additionally, according to conversations
with grantees, many other major AGI safety donors defer to Open Philanthropy when
deciding which projects to support. Some of these donors are high net-worth
individuals, while others are grantmaking organizations that have themselves received
funds from Open Philanthropy [293-295].

These close ties within this funding ecosystem reflect the fact many of these donors
supported AGI safety efforts for almost a decade before the field began to attract
broader attention. But this dynamic may also cause disproportionate funding to be
directed to projects considered promising by the same small group of individuals.
While this is entirely within the rights of these groups as private entities, it may
nonetheless have the effect of reducing the breadth of research that the ecosystem
supports. This concern was raised privately by at least one Open Philanthropy grantee.

In addition to funding a large number of AGI safety projects, Open Philanthropy has
also backed and influenced major frontier AI labs [296-298]. The complex relationships
within the AI research and funder ecosystem may lead to some risk of conflicts of
interest.




                                                                                 221 of 284
Annex F: Persuasion and manipulation

Many AI researchers expect advanced AI systems to develop persuasion abilities that
could match or exceed those of the most skilled human beings [113,114]. OpenAI CEO
Sam Altman recently expressed this view, writing, “[I] expect [AI] to be capable of
superhuman persuasion well before it is superhuman at general intelligence, which may
lead to some very strange outcomes.” [301]

There are two reasons to expect advanced AI will become effective at persuasion. First,
training an AI system for persuasiveness is economically and strategically valuable. We
expect that domains such as sales and customer service — which have clear success
metrics that an AI system could be trained on and can consist primarily of text-based
interactions — will likely drive the early adoption of persuasion-tuned advanced AI
systems. But second, fine-tuning an AI system with current techniques like RLHF or
DPO explicitly rewards the system for generating text that is highly rated by a human
evaluator. And this in turn may already be making today’s AI systems effective, by
default, at persuading humans of the truth, trustworthiness, or helpfulness of their
generated text [302].

There are indications that current frontier models have meaningful persuasive
capabilities in some contexts, though these appear to be still well below human level.
For example, in an early test of GPT-4, it successfully persuaded a freelance worker to
solve a CAPTCHA problem on its behalf by claiming to be a disabled human [29]. And
AI systems already elicit strong attachments from human users that can lead to
dependency, even when those humans are fully aware they are interacting with an AI
system [303—306].

If advanced AI systems were to develop human-level or superhuman persuasion
capabilities, significant new risks would emerge. In particular, these systems could allow
geopolitical adversaries — as well as frontier labs — to shape the opinions of
policymakers, regulators, and the general public. Frontier labs in particular could face
an incentive to deploy superhuman persuasion systems to influence regulators,
legislators, and voters to create a regulatory environment favorable to them. Despite
this being a violation of democratic norms and expectations, certain forms of these
activities may not be illegal. It is not clear, for example, what laws would apply in a
scenario in which a frontier lab used a persuasive AI system to craft highly effective
arguments against the regulation of frontier AI research.




                                                                                222 of 284
Superhuman persuasion capabilities – in any form, and wielded by any entity either
within or outside the United States – would be a novel and profoundly destabilizing
force. In the most extreme case, an individual in control of such an AI system could
exert unprecedented influence not only over their own organization and immediate
environment, but over society at large.




                                                                               223 of 284
