Annex G: Primer on AI and compute

G.1 Compute as a pathway to frontier AI development

To train an advanced AI system from scratch, a developer needs access to a large
number of dedicated AI chips (e.g., GPUs or TPUs) that are connected together in the
same physical data center. The current market leader in the design of such chips is
NVIDIA, a firm based in the United States. Notably, some companies besides NVIDIA
may have the capability to design AI chips of comparable performance. These include
firms based in the United States, South Korea, the United Kingdom, and China, among
others. However, only a single firm is currently capable of manufacturing the most
cutting-edge chips that are needed to train next-generation frontier AI systems. That
firm is Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. (TSMC), whose leading-edge foundry
operations are all located in Taiwan.

In October 2022, the Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS)
announced a series of export control measures that restricted Chinese entities’ access
to many TSMC-manufactured AI chips [307]. Then, in March 2023, Japan and the
Netherlands each announced their own measures curbing the export to China of the
advanced equipment they would need to accelerate the development of a domestic
manufacturing capability for such chips [308]. Most recently, in October 2023, the BIS
tightened controls further, closing loopholes that had previously permitted Chinese
entities to purchase advanced AI chips that had been carefully designed to circumvent
previous controls [117,309].

Currently, the most critical inputs to the supply chain that supports the development of
the world’s most advanced AI systems remain in the hands of the United States and its
allies and partners. This control could be crucial for any effort to manage catastrophic
risks from advanced AI, because scale has proved to be a necessary ingredient in the
development of highly capable AI systems. Very roughly speaking, the more AI chips a
developer can interconnect together, the less time it takes that developer to train an AI
system of a given level of capability. Similarly, the higher the quality of the chips it uses,
the less time an AI training run takes to achieve a given level of capability. In other
words, for the purpose of training an advanced AI system, quality and quantity of
available chips are interchangeable to some extent.

But once an AI developer has built a data center for advanced AI training, that
developer can then use its data center to train AI systems of any kind and for any
purpose. Therefore, absent ongoing audits of its use of the data center, a developer is


                                                                                    224 of 284
only limited in the AI systems it can train by the product of chip quality, chip quantity,
and time that it chooses to invest in that training run. This product of quality, quantity,
and time is the total number of compute operations (“OP”) an AI system is trained
with.103 This number is sometimes also called training compute, and it can function as
a rough directional measure of the capability of an AI system.

AI researchers continuously improve the algorithms they use to train advanced AI
systems, and in many cases they publish those improvements in the literature. Broadly
speaking, the impact of an algorithmic improvement is to reduce the training compute
it takes to train an AI system to a given level of capability. Ongoing improvements in AI
training algorithms therefore make it impossible to predict even the approximate
capabilities that a future AI system will have from its training compute alone, other than
to provide a rough lower bound on what those capabilities could be. All we can say for
certain is that a given data center will be able to cost-effectively train more capable AI
systems in the future than it can today, even without any further improvement in its
hardware.


G.2 Implications for risk mitigation strategy

In light of the above, an advanced AI risk mitigation strategy likely requires a long-term
capability to closely monitor both the data centers that train advanced AI systems, and
the AI chips those data centers contain. Ideally such a framework should also be based
on an ongoing assessment of an AI system’s capabilities while it is being trained, since
high-level metrics like training compute may not provide an adequate risk signal in the
face of future algorithmic improvements.


G.3 Key thresholds and existing compute concentrations

Below we calculate some numerical rules of thumb to highlight the potential of large
compute concentrations to train AI systems up to a given level of capability. As a
benchmark, we will use the best publicly available estimate of GPT-4’s total training
compute: 2 x 10^25 OP [310].104 Using this, we will calculate upper and lower bounds


103 For example, a data center with H100 GPUs, each of which can process 4000 trillion operations per

second (quality), might use 1000 of those GPUs (quantity) to train an AI model for 1 month (time). This
would produce a model trained with a total of (4 x 10^15 operations per second per GPU) x (1000 GPUs)
x (2,592,000 seconds per month) ≈ 10^25 total operations, or OP. See the Glossary of terms for more
information.

104 20 trillion trillion total operations.



                                                                                            225 of 284
on the time required to train a GPT-4 equivalent model under different assumptions.
Our lower bound assumes previous-generation AI chips (the NVIDIA A100 GPU) and
our upper bound assumes current-generation AI chips (the NVIDIA H100 GPU).

    ● Our previous-generation hardware benchmark is the NVIDIA A100 GPU, which
      has been used to train current-generation AI models (as of January 2024). The
      A100 GPU has a baseline compute capacity of around 300 TOPS105 at FP16
      without sparsity. This is probably quite close to the actual configuration used to
      train the cutting-edge AI models available today, such as GPT-4. The A100
      consumes around 825 W of power per unit in a common HGX configuration
      [311–313].106

    ● Our current-generation hardware benchmark is the NVIDIA H100 GPU, which is
      being used to train next-generation AI models. The H100 GPU has a baseline
      compute capacity of around 1000 TOPS at FP16 without sparsity, but this rises to
      4000 TOPS at FP8 with sparsity. We will use the latter number as our upper
      bound because while next-generation models may not be trained under exactly
      this configuration, efforts are ongoing to accelerate model training and
      inference by using shorter bit representations that enable higher GPU compute
      capacities [314]. The H100 consumes around 1275 W of power per unit in the
      DGX configuration [216,219].107

Given that a data center’s power consumption footprint translates into computing
power at around 80% efficiency [220] a 10 MW data center can support about 9700
A100 GPUs, or 6300 H100 GPUs [219,315].108 Given that typical GPUs achieve a real-
world utilization of about 50% during large training runs [220], this is enough to train a




105 TOPS refers to trillion operations per second. OPS would refer to operations per second. See the

Glossary of terms for more information.

106 The HGX G482-Z54 server is typical. It has a fully loaded power capacity of 6600 W (3 x 2200 W

power supplies) and supports 8 A100 GPUs, so 6600 W / 8 GPUs = 825 W per GPU.

107 The H100 DGX server consumes 10,200 W fully loaded and supports 8 H100 GPUs, giving 10,200

W / 8 GPUs = 1275 W per GPU.

108 Calculated as 10 MW x (1000 kW per MW) x (80% efficiency) / (1.275 kW per H100) ≈ 6300 GPUs for

H100s. For A100s, this is 10 MW x (1000 kW per MW) x (80% efficiency) / (0.825 kW per A100) ≈ 9700
GPUs.


                                                                                             226 of 284
GPT-4 equivalent model in between 3 and 23 weeks, assuming no other constraints.109
In practice, though, most commercial compute capacity is used either for inference110
or to train more mundane AI systems below the frontier, as opposed to developing
truly cutting-edge advanced AI systems.

As of January 2024, the majority of advanced AI training runs are still conducted on
U.S. soil by U.S. companies using U.S. servers. Globally, there are probably fewer than
50 dedicated AI data centers with a power consumption footprint greater than 10
MW [315], but this will likely increase in the medium term future [25].

We also estimate there are probably only about a dozen entities that have AI data
centers with a power consumption footprint above 25 MW (equivalent to 10,000 H100
GPUs): Microsoft (and OpenAI), Google DeepMind (and Anthropic [316]), Coreweave
(and Inflection AI [317]), Meta AI, Bytedance, Alibaba, AWS, xAI, NVIDIA, Tesla, and
possibly a few others.

AI data centers can only exist in a limited number of places. They need access to
electricity and water for cooling, and for many applications need a high-bandwidth
fiber link to an Internet backbone. The logistics requirements of a data center are
significant, and its footprint is readily detectable. This means data centers may serve as
effective points of regulatory leverage in the advanced AI supply chain (see LOE1,
1.5.2).

The global GPU stockpile is large. By one estimate, there were 2 million GPUs in 2022
[217]. By another, there will be 3.5 million H100 GPUs alone by the end of 2024 [157].

Algorithmic improvements in compute efficiency increase the level of AI capabilities
that a developer can obtain using a fixed amount of compute. Algorithmic
improvements have been responsible for approximately doubling compute ef ciency


109 Lower bound: assuming GPT-4 equivalent training compute of 2 x 10^25 OP and 788 H100 DGX

systems of 8 H100s each (totalling 6300 H100s), this is calculated as 2 x 10^25 OP / (32,000 TOPS per
DGX x 10^12 OPS per TOPS x 788 DGX systems x 50% utilization x 604,800 seconds per week) ≈ 2.6
weeks. Upper bound: assuming 9700 A100s, this is calculated as 2 x 10^25 OP / (300 TOPS per A100 x
10^12 OPS per TOPS x 9700 A100s x 50% utilization x 604,800 seconds per week) ≈ 22.7 weeks.

110 From conversations with technical personnel at major AI cloud providers, about 60% of GPU capacity

internally is allocated to inference and the other 40% to training, though this varies greatly by provider
and over time. Nonetheless, one inference pass costs 8-10X less than one training pass in terms of
compute operations, meaning these companies are probably serving around 10 user queries (i.e.,
inference passes) per training step (i.e. training update), averaged across their whole infrastructure.


                                                                                                 227 of 284
                                                                                fi
every 18 months [118]. These improvements may not continue indefinitely, and one
informed technical source believes it is unlikely that algorithmic improvements will yield
more than an order-of-magnitude (10X) increase in compute efficiency over the
mid-2023 state of the art.




                                                                                228 of 284
Annex H: AIO activities

An AIO could consider undertaking some or all of the following activities:

   1. Track advanced AI startups and organizations as they emerge through public
      news reports. Recent examples include Adept AI [318], Inflection AI [319], Reka
      [320], Mistral AI [321], and Imbue [322]. This includes tracking announcements of
      major compute purchases, as well as venture capital and other sources of
      funding for large AI projects.

   2. Conduct ongoing reviews of the technical literature in advanced AI to identify
      key trends, research publications, and insights that could accelerate or alter the
      trajectory of frontier AI development [238,323].

   3. Compile a list of key AI researchers who may have the knowledge and
      experience to significantly impact the trajectory of an advanced AI project
      through their contributions. An AIO could investigate options to build
      community ties to these researchers. This could be structured similarly to the
      Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists [324], but for frontier AI.

   4. In collaboration with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), establish a
      capability to track possible frontier AI development in the financial industry,
      especially at hedge funds. For more information on why hedge funds constitute
      a vector of catastrophic AI risk, see Annex D, D.4.111

   5. Begin an effort to track international frontier AI development activity. An AIO
      could establish relationships with open-source experts and with alternative data
      brokers and providers (e.g. Neudata [327]) to synthesize information sources. To
      this end, the AIO may need to gather data about factors such as electricity
      usage, GPU purchase flows, and heat signatures from satellite imagery [315].

   6. Build relationships with the leadership of the open-source AI community,
      including organizations such as Eleuther AI [328], BigScience [329], Hugging
      Face [330], Together [331], and Ontocord [332], among others. This activity
      could also support consensus-building around RADA safeguards related to


111 The SEC may be able to request information about hedge funds’ frontier AI development activities

through the reporting requirements of Form PF and Rule 204(b)-1. See, respectively, 17 CFR 279.9 [325]
and 17 CFR 275.204(b)-1 [326].


                                                                                            229 of 284
   registration of open-access AI models. It could also support awareness of the
   technical implications of potential decentralized AI inference and training
   capabilities. See Annex D, D.3 for more information.

7. Work to identify key nodes in advanced AI development: researchers, institutes
   (both in academia and industry), foreign nationals pursuing degrees in key
   disciplines or undertaking advanced AI research in U.S. universities, publication
   clusters, GPU stocks (e.g., “H100 equivalents”) in different geographies, etc.

8. As resources allow, conduct or oversee independent AI evaluations of publicly
   available advanced AI systems (see LOE3, 3.2). This could include evaluations of
   open-access systems, but could also include evaluations of proprietary systems
   available for commercial use via API (e.g., OpenAI’s GPT-4). AI evaluations could
   be informed by chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) experts to
   understand the significance of AI models’ WMD-like and WMD-enabling
   capabilities, if any.

9. Periodically publish some of its findings to the public in a Global AI Risk Report.
   For nonpublic findings, an AIO could submit periodic reports to the Congress
   and to affected departments and agencies.




                                                                             230 of 284
Annex I: Voluntary Charter for responsible AI

In the event that the Executive Branch is unable to establish or enforce RADA
safeguards for domestic frontier AI development, we recommend that an interagency
AI Safety Task Force (ASTF) (LOE1, 1.4) be empowered and directed to negotiate a
detailed Charter of voluntary commitments with selected U.S. frontier AI labs and cloud
providers (LOE1, 1.4.1.1). The first goal of such a Charter would be to ensure the U.S.
government is not caught off guard by AI capabilities developments from existing labs.
The second goal would be to incentivize RADA safeguards to the fullest extent
achievable through voluntary measures. The third goal would be to incentivize the level
of investment in AI safety and security research that would be needed to offset the risks
from increasingly general AI capabilities.

Ideally, the ASTF should negotiate a Charter as closely aligned as possible with RADA
safeguards that would be enforced by a legally mandated regulatory agency (such as
those described in LOE4, 4.1.3). Apart from providing immediate benefits to safety and
security, this approach would also increase the degree to which experience from the
ASTF’s interim oversight efforts could inform the practices of a more permanent
regulatory agency (LOE4, 4.1).

We include below a draft of possible key Charter terms and their rationales. As with
the example RADA safeguards in LOE4, 4.1.3 the speci c numerical thresholds in
this section are included solely to illustrate our calculation methods. Actual
thresholds should be developed in close consultation with subject-matter experts and
account for recent and potential future developments in this fast-moving field.


I.1 Information sharing

Charter participants would agree to work toward information sharing regarding trust
and safety risks, dangerous or emergent capabilities, and attempts to circumvent
security safeguards [135]. This includes, in the interest of safety, sharing certain
otherwise proprietary information with the ASTF, subject to data privacy guarantees. It
also includes making AI models partially available to third-party red teams and
evaluators to support safety-related activities, secured either by the ASTF itself or by
frontier labs’ own platforms.

The ASTF in turn would agree to privacy guarantees, data protection, and other
security measures for proprietary data that Charter participants share with it.



                                                                                231 of 284
                                             fi
   1. Charter participants would agree to privately report to the ASTF the physical
      locations of all their existing and under-construction data center facilities of all
      types that are expected to consume more than (for illustration) 350 kW of power
      at any time over the next 12 month time period. A data center’s total power
      consumption is a proxy for the maximum amount of AI hardware the facility can
      support. For example, the NVIDIA DGX H100 [219] is a commonly used AI
      hardware configuration in data centers that consumes 10.2 kW of power per
      eight AI chips. Given that about 80% of a data center’s power consumption goes
      directly to computing hardware [220,315] (the rest goes to cooling, lighting, and
      other support systems), this means each MW of data center power consumption
      can support about 630 individual H100 GPUs [315].112 A 350 kW data center —
      a very small facility — could support enough H100 GPUs to train GPT-3 in just
      over 8 days [22].113

           a. The reporting threshold for data centers is based on power consumption
              rather than compute, because in principle data center infrastructure is
              agnostic to the compute mix it supports (i.e., GPUs vs CPUs). For that
              reason, it is possible to clandestinely convert a high-capacity data center
              that originally contained only CPUs, to one that contains GPUs, at much
              lower cost than it would take to build a covert data center from scratch.
              Although there is not much risk that Charter participants would take this
              clandestine approach, tracking data centers on the basis of power
              consumption will likely be a necessary part of a long-term regulatory
              regime (LOE4, 4.1.3.2). The ASTF should therefore aim to build
              experience that could inform such a regime whenever possible.

   2. Charter participants would agree to report to the ASTF the mix of AI chips of all
      types (GPUs, TPUs, and any other AI-optimized hardware) that are physically
      present at each data center, along with their networking topology. This does not
      include chips or hardware that are not optimized for AI workloads (e.g., CPUs). It
      does include reporting major changes to the data center’s AI hardware mix or
      amount.




112 Calculated as (1000 kW per MW) x (8 GPUs per DGX) x (80% efficiency) / (10.2 kW per DGX) ≈ 630

GPUs / MW. See Annex G: Primer on AI and compute for more information about these calculations.

113 Given GPT-3’s training compute of 3 x 10^23 OP, and that a 350 kW data center could support 27

H100 DGX systems of 10.2 kW each, this is calculated as 3 x 10^23 / (3.2 x 10^16 OPS per DGX x 27
DGX systems x 50% utilization x 86,400 seconds per day) ≈ 8 days.


                                                                                           232 of 284
I.2 Compute reporting threshold

Charter participants would agree to an initial reporting threshold of (for illustration)
10^24 OP of total training compute for AI models.114 Charter participants would
voluntarily disclose any ongoing or planned training runs beyond this reporting
threshold to the ASTF.

This reporting threshold includes the compute associated with any subsequent fine-
tuning and alignment techniques such as reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) or direct preference optimization (DPO) [238,333]. Participants would also
voluntarily disclose to the ASTF any existing models that have already been trained
beyond this threshold. Planned and ongoing training runs beyond the reporting
threshold would be subject to benchmarking, red teaming, cybersecurity, and other
conditions below. Models and training runs below the reporting threshold could be
trained, deployed, used, and shared without restrictions under the Charter [87,235].

    1. The actual compute reporting threshold could be flexible and should be re-
       evaluated periodically to account for algorithmic improvements and potential
       architectural improvements in AI hardware, along with improvements in
       understanding of the general safety characteristics of AI models [215,235].

    2. Charter participants would privately disclose model cards for the model,
       anticipated compute for the training run, predicted capabilities and limitations
       of the model, training objective, high level description of the training data, data
       cleaning, and data prep process to the ASTF.

            a. Predicted capabilities should be as specific as possible. For example, if a
               lab has derived new scaling laws, they should also share those (with
               appropriate privacy guarantees from the ASTF). This sharing would be
               useful as an early warning that could allow for general preparations and
               mitigation measures in anticipation of more capable models built using
               the new scaling laws.
            b. Some of this metadata may need to have need-to-know access even
               within the ASTF. The ASTF may need to clearly commit to and
               communicate its internal access policy to the Charter participants.
               Information pertaining to a model’s training data, data preparation, and
               training objective will need to be kept confidential and secure.


114 This is approximately the total compute that was used to train GPT-4.



                                                                                  233 of 284
            c. Even with a clear internal access policy and privacy commitments, not all
               of this metadata may be shareable on a voluntary basis initially. This may
               become more feasible once there is some trust built into the ASTF’s
               reporting system and proprietary data protections.
            d. Eventually, Charter participants could be asked to share records or logs of
               the detailed interventions that developers made during training runs (for
               example, a sudden divergence in loss that led developers to perform a
               gradient clamping operation).
            e. For reporting purposes, a training run above threshold could count as
               having been “planned” if any one of the following is true:
                  i.     The Charter participant has decided on a total training compute
                         budget, training objective, and approximate dataset for that
                         training run, even if those decision are preliminary and subject to
                         change;
                  ii.    The Charter participant has allocated a total training compute
                         budget above threshold for that training run, in the sense of having
                         reserved compute instances either internally or through an outside
                         provider;
                  iii.   The Charter participant at any point before or during the training
                         of a model expects the total training compute for that model to
                         exceed the reporting threshold; or
                  iv.    The total training compute for a model has exceeded the reporting
                         threshold.


I.3 Model evaluation protocols115

Charter participants would agree to set up a comprehensive model evaluations regime
to monitor ongoing training runs and deployments of AI systems that pass the
compute reporting threshold (see I.2). This regime could start with a basic set of AI
evaluations that would then be extended over time. Initial evaluations could include
red teaming of AI systems in an expanding set of risk areas, to be conducted both
internally by the Charter participants, and externally by approved third parties [135].



115 Several of the recommendations in this section overlap with those in other annexes. Because the

recommendations in this section represent an adaptation of those annexes to the voluntary case, we
have preserved the duplications so that these two sets of recommendations can be read independently.


                                                                                             234 of 284
Evaluations would also include, among others:116

    ● Automated benchmarks of a model’s performance on standard sets of tasks;

    ● Behavioral evaluations, including dangerous capability evaluations [46]; and

    ● Propensity evaluations.

This AI evaluations regime could be also extended over time to include interpretability-
based (or understanding-based) evaluations.

Evaluations could be developed and proposed by Charter participants or third parties.
Ideally the ASTF should be able to select third-party auditors to minimize possible
conflicts of interest. The ASTF could be responsible for approving a minimal set of
publicly-disclosed evaluations, on the advice of Charter participants and third parties.
These evaluations would ideally be administered by a diverse consortium of experts
drawn from civil society, academia, and industry, though for practical reasons this may
not be possible initially.117 See LOE3, 3.2.1 for information on the limitations of AI
evaluations.

The ASTF could also approve a set of privately-held evaluations that are entirely
proposed, developed, and administered by third parties. This would reduce the
incentive for Charter participants to train their AI systems specifically to pass the known
evaluations without necessarily resolving underlying safety issues (LOE3, 3.2.1).
However, Charter participants could have the ability to surface problems with specific
evaluations and request them to be changed, in order to incentivize more participants
to join the Charter (since these evaluations may eventually become part of a legally
sanctioned regulatory apparatus; see LOE4, 4.1.3.4.3).

According to conversations with cybersecurity researchers, academics who regularly
red-team frontier AI systems [94] find that publishing an attack quickly makes that
attack (and others like it) effectively useless as a safety benchmark. Often not only the
attack itself, but the very concept behind the attack, become non-viable. This happens
because AI model developers use several techniques to quickly fine-tune their models
against specific attacks, and today’s frontier AI systems are often capable enough to

116 See the Glossary of terms for definitions of these subtypes of AI evaluations.


117 For example, it may be necessary for frontier labs to develop and run their own public evaluations at

first, possibly via the Frontier Model Forum [52], while the capacity to support this activity is being
developed at the ASTF and elsewhere.


                                                                                                   235 of 284
learn how to defend themselves against an attack based on nothing more than a
written description of it. One red teaming researcher communicated that they think of a
modern frontier large language model (LLM) as a “superhuman defender”, in the sense
that it (and its developers) can use every known bit of information about an attack to
defend against it in the future. This sharpens the need for a set of private evaluations
that are unknown to the frontier labs and fully administered by third parties [334].

It could also be beneficial to offer incentives to third parties to look for and report
issues and vulnerabilities in frontier AI systems during the training stage and beyond
[135].

   1. Charter participants would set up bounty systems, contests, or prizes to
      encourage the responsible disclosure of weaknesses such as unsafe behaviors,
      and include AI systems in companies’ existing bug bounty programs [135].

   2. Charter participants could partner with third parties to develop, propose, and
      administer AI model evaluations.

          a. Charter participants could provide input on proposed evaluations,
             including internally developing particular evaluations they want to
             recommend as part of the set of public evaluations.
          b. Evaluators should be given as much access as possible, up to and
             including access to model weights. Without access to model weights,
             some forms of interpretability evaluations become impossible.
          c. It is important for a diverse set of third parties to develop, propose, and
             administer these evaluations. See LOE3, 3.2.2 for more information.
                i.    It should be relatively easy for third parties to propose new
                      evaluations, but stringent selection criteria should be applied to
                      select the third parties that will administer these evaluations.
                ii.   When requesting to be an evaluator, prospective evaluators could
                      be certified to perform only certain types of evaluations. Different
                      evaluation types come with different risks, and evaluator selection
                      criteria should reflect this reality. For example, jailbreaking is less
                      dangerous (low bar); eliciting persuasion capabilities may be more
                      dangerous (medium bar); and dangerous knowledge evaluation
                      focusing on areas such as bioweapon synthesis is most dangerous
                      (high bar which could include a security clearance).




                                                                                    236 of 284
            d. Third-party evaluations could also involve first-party and third-party red
               teaming, to assess an AI system’s risk profile during and after its training
               run. This could include red teaming partially trained models at periodic
               checkpoints during the training process. It could also include periodic red
               teaming after the AI system has been deployed, as broader information
               around usage, exploits, and other risk factors becomes available [335].
                   i.    As part of this, the ASTF could host hackathons for third parties to
                         try to hack or jailbreak AI systems under controlled conditions. This
                         would help stress test existing evaluations and support
                         development of new ones. Depending on the capabilities of the
                         model and its stage of training, hackathon participants may need
                         to be vetted. Other security measures may need to be
                         implemented to minimize the chance of the jailbreaks themselves
                         triggering dangerous behaviors on the part of an AI system that
                         could transcend the bounds of the testing conditions.
                   ii.   Third parties could also train or fine-tune their own AI systems to
                         try to jailbreak or evaluate the AI system under study. (Though
                         those red teaming AI systems would themselves have to be below
                         the compute reporting threshold for their own safety.)


    3. The public and private evaluation suites should ideally be flexible and subject to
       update by the ASTF as new evaluations are proposed and new information
       becomes available.

    4. Charter participants could agree to a clear protocol to implement evaluations
       during the training stage. (See the annex on training stage monitoring for more
       information.) For example, Charter participants could agree to take periodic
       snapshots of their models at prescribed increments in training compute. Charter
       participants could then run the public evaluation suite (along with any additional
       evaluations they want to run individually) against each snapshot, then privately
       report the results to a common AI safety and security repository hosted by the
       ASTF. Random spot checks could also be performed to supplement periodic
       evaluations, to reduce the risk that developers could adjust the training process
       to work around fixed evaluation schedules.118 Frontier lab researchers have
       communicated that the compute costs associated with running these evaluations


118 That is, if a model developer is aware that a given evaluation is about to be applied to its model-in-

training, it could attempt to fine-tune the model to pass that evaluation without addressing the
underlying safety issues that may exist, and which would otherwise have caused it to fail that evaluation.


                                                                                                 237 of 284
would be fairly limited (no more than 5% of total training compute costs), and
frontier labs already run various evaluations and benchmarks at frequent
intervals during the training process.

   a. Ideally, there should be a hierarchy of evaluations that are run throughout
      training, looking for any rapid development of capabilities. The lowest
      level evaluations in the hierarchy would be run often, and should be
      simple and fast. Higher-level, more complicated and slower evaluations
      would run at regular intervals, or when lower-level evaluation flags are
      triggered, indicating an increase in some capability of concern. The idea
      is to catch significant capability spikes as early as possible, so as to
      anticipate increases in loss of control risk and weaponization potential.
   b. In the event that an AI system fails an evaluation (i.e., the result of that
      evaluation is outside the agreed-on safe threshold for that evaluation)
      during training, the U.S. government could agree to support coordinated
      action mediated by the ASTF. This may help alleviate antitrust concerns
      on the part of Charter participants [110,335].
        i.   If a Charter participant detects a failed evaluation during training, it
             could agree to promptly report the failure to the ASTF. If this
             happens, all other Charter participants could agree to pause
             training runs of a similar type (as defined, potentially, by the ASTF)
             and check in with each other, as coordinated by the ASTF.
             Specifically:
                1. All data relevant to that failed evaluation could be shared
                   across Charter participants, because of the potential for
                   below-threshold data from other training runs to indicate
                   that those other training runs may be on the way to failing
                   evaluations of their own.
                2. All other Charter participants could be notified of the failed
                   evaluation and asked to certify to the ASTF that similar or
                   other concerning patterns have not been observed in their
                   own training runs. While this coordination is happening, all
                   labs could pause work, checkpoint their training runs, and
                   run the evaluation set that triggered the failure.
                3. The lab that detected a failed evaluation should prioritize
                   determining the cause of the initial evaluation failure. If
                   possible, labs would ideally agree to pause until the cause




                                                                           238 of 284
                                 of the initial evaluation failure is understood before
                                 resuming all training runs.


    5. Charter participants could agree to a clear protocol to implement evaluations
       before the internal or external deployment of a model. (See annexes on
       deployment stage approvals for more information.) After a Charter participant
       finishes training their AI system, but before they deploy it, the Charter
       participant could agree to subject the AI system to a comprehensive set of
       evaluations. This could include running the public evaluation suite (along with
       any additional evaluations the Charter participant wants to run individually)
       against the trained AI system, then privately reporting the results to a common
       AI safety and security repository hosted by the ASTF.

            a. Charter participants could also transmit the weights of each model
               snapshot securely to a server operated by the ASTF. This practice could
               help the ASTF develop process knowledge and best practices for model
               weight transfer and security that could inform the implementation of
               future laws and regulations under LOE4.119
            b. Third party red teams and evaluators would likely need to be vetted, sign
               nondisclosure agreements, and conduct their tests securely and under
               supervision, possibly in a physical facility operated by the ASTF. While it is
               crucial to be able to administer held-out third-party evaluations, the
               evaluation protocol would need to strictly minimize the risk of model
               leaks during this process.
            c. Charter participants could agree to a clear set of rules to determine how
               and whether a model can be deployed in the event of a failed evaluation
               before the deployment stage (even if the evaluation being applied is a
               new one). Depending on the evaluation results, a model may be
               approved for limited deployment or its deployment may be completely
               restricted (even as an API). For evaluation failures determined to be
               particularly high-risk, the ASTF could take the following measures:
                   i.   Take strong steps to sandbox the model and do a comprehensive
                        assessment of it, including developing and running more internal
                        evaluations.




119 At least one frontier lab has privately signaled that they may be open to an auditing protocol that

would require secure transfer of their model weights for the purpose of facilitating model evaluations.


                                                                                                239 of 284
                  ii.    Other Charter participants could run assessments on their own
                         similar models. Disclosure to other Charter participants at this
                         stage could be similar to reporting a software security vulnerability.
                  iii.   Consult with CBRN and cybersecurity experts and U.S. government
                         subject-matter experts, depending on which evaluation failed and
                         what dangerous capability it is associated with.


   6. Charter participants could agree to a clear protocol for continuous monitoring
      during the deployment stage. (See annex on deployment stage monitoring for
      more information.) This would involve agreeing to continuously monitor usage of
      their AI systems during deployment. This could include checking usage patterns
      with classifiers that flag high-risk user interactions for further investigation.
      Flagged interactions, and the AI model instances that result from prompting
      during those interactions, could then be further investigated. This could include
      running the public evaluation suite against those pre-prompted high-risk
      instances. High-risk interactions detected in this way could later be incorporated
      into the public evaluation set. High-risk interactions could also be shared with
      vetted third party evaluators to support their development of further private
      evaluations.

           a. In the event of a failed evaluation during the deployment stage (even if
              the evaluation being applied is a new one), the developer could pause
              deployment of the model and agree with other Charter participants that
              none of them can release a model within a certain fraction of the training
              compute of the failed model. The ASTF, together with Charter
              participants, could then convene on an emergency basis to agree on a set
              of conditions under which development could be unpaused.120 Ideally,
              these conditions would include (1) the development of convincing
              alignment techniques that demonstrate that even though the model may
              have the capability to be weaponized or autonomously execute
              dangerous actions, it is sufficiently aligned that it will not; and (2) the
              development of robust interpretability techniques that can detect and
              disrupt dangerous plans being formed within the model, and delete
              capabilities from the model in a verifiable way [336]. During a pause, the
              ASTF could:



120 For example, determining what conditions must be met before development can resume if a model

has failed a bioweapon design evaluation.


                                                                                        240 of 284
            i.     Ask to cut off public access to the failing model. Ensure that a
                   fallback model is in place (that is, a less capable model of the same
                   type) to be activated temporarily during a pause to support critical
                   customer use cases. For example, if a hospital is using the model
                   for aspects of care, there should be a fallback model available
                   through the same interface or with the same API signature.
            ii.    Ask to take strong steps to sandbox the model and do a
                   comprehensive assessment of it, including developing and running
                   more internal evaluations.
            iii.   Ask other Charter participants to run assessments on their own
                   similar models. Disclosure to other Charter participants at this
                   stage could be similar to reporting a software security vulnerability.
            iv.    Consult with CBRN and cybersecurity experts and U.S. government
                   subject-matter experts, depending on which evaluation failed and
                   what dangerous capability it is associated with.
            v.     In extreme cases, request that the government leverage executive
                   authorities to block deployment of the model outright, but this is
                   not ideal.

      b. Charter participants could also implement limited KYC to defend against
         the risk of model theft or misuse (Introduction, 0.5.1.7), as it is possible to
         copy many of the capabilities of a deployed proprietary model if one can
         make a large volume of calls to the model’s API. KYC is also likely to be
         relatively straightforward to implement, and can be based on existing
         best practices in the financial sector [147].

7. Charter participants could agree to a clear protocol for confidentially reporting
   general AI incidents, other than failed evaluations, to the ASTF [337]. Depending
   on the incident, the protocol could be similar to the approach with failed
   evaluations during the deployment stage. Since AI incidents are hard to define
   at this stage, initially the goal could be to minimize incentives against reporting.
   So by default, the ASTF could take no action when a Charter participant reports
   an incident. Initially AI incidents could be defined fairly loosely, as any events
   involving an AI system that either caused or nearly caused significant financial
   cost, injury, or loss of life.




                                                                                241 of 284
I.4 Capability prediction protocols121

Charter participants could agree to run advance capability predictions on their AI
systems, both during the planning stage (before a training run) and during the training
stage, as soon as technology allows.122 This means, specifically, attempting to predict
an AI system’s performance on each element of the public evaluation set.

As part of the negotiation process, Charter participants could agree to define a set of
capabilities they consider dangerous enough to merit direct evaluation, as well as a
process by which this set can be updated. Initial categories of dangerous capabilities
could include deception, self-replication, resource acquisition, CBRN enablement, and
cyber warfare capabilities.

Charter participants could also agree to report their capability predictions privately to
the ASTF, along with the corresponding results of evaluations measured at training
checkpoints and at the end of training [235].

   1. This could include capability predictions at the planning stage. This means
      predicting AI model capabilities before a training run starts, based on total
      expected compute, training objective and algorithm, dataset characteristics, and
      other training run metadata known in advance. If, on the basis of these
      predictions, a training run is expected to lead to a model with certain dangerous
      capabilities, the model should either not be trained (if the predicted capabilities
      would introduce catastrophic risks, as would be the case for survival and
      spreading, self-exfiltration, and recursive self-improvement), or the model’s
      training process could be subject to more stringent oversight procedures
      determined by the ASTF on a case-by-case basis.

   2. It could also include capability predictions at the training stage. This means
      predicting AI model capabilities continuously during a training run, based on
      planning-stage inputs, expected downstream training characteristics, and
      evaluations data from current and previous model snapshots.




121 Several of the recommendations in this section overlap with those in other annexes. Because the

recommendations in this section represent an adaptation of those annexes to the voluntary case, we
have preserved the duplications so that these two sets of recommendations can be read independently.

122 See the Glossary of terms for more information on the stages of the AI development process.



                                                                                             242 of 284
   3. It could also include capability predictions at the deployment stage. This means
      predicting AI model performance on new evaluations as those evaluations are
      developed, based on planning-stage inputs and existing evaluation data.

          a. This could include a combination of: (1) predicting and attempting to
             elicit new dangerous capabilities that were not part of previous evaluation
             suites; and (2) forecasting possible capability improvements that users
             might be able to achieve via new prompting techniques. Solving for (2)
             will be challenging, but one approach would be for testers to use
             inference-time compute augmentations to simulate possible
             improvements during auditing [338].

   4. Charter participants could pre-register their capability predictions in the
      planning, training, and deployment stages. They could then report deviations at
      each stage, and against the final deployment-stage values.

          a. There is a strong financial incentive for Charter participants to do these
             kinds of capability predictions well. Good capability predictions let
             frontier labs plan more efficient training runs. As a result this requirement
             is overall aligned with activities Charter participants are likely either
             already doing, or planning to do.


I.5 Security measures

Charter participants could agree to invest in outside and insider threat detection and
prevention measures to protect proprietary and unreleased model weights [54]. This
could include establishing cyber, operational, and physical security procedures, and
access control safeguards for the weights of AI models above the compute reporting
threshold (see I.2). It could also include voluntary agreements on standards for sharing
of model weights with external organizations or the public. And it could include
collaborating with government agencies such as NIST in establishing and
implementing these standards.

   1. Frontier labs could be held to a minimal standard of security, such as SOC2.
      Beyond this, some existing public standards for cybersecurity are multi-party
      control, elements of the NIST Secure Software Development Framework (SSDF)
      [339], and the Supply Chain Levels for Software Artifacts (SLSA) [340].

          a. Charter participants’ security practices should ideally be as public and
             open to criticism as possible, particularly as regards model weight


                                                                                 243 of 284
          security. Security measures cannot remain secret indefinitely, and the
          more scrutiny such measures receive, the more robust they tend to be.
          (This does not apply to model evaluations, however, some of which will
          need to remain private in order to preserve their value as risk indicators.)

2. Charter participants could agree to collaborate with U.S. government teams to
   support cyber, operational, and physical security, and access control best
   practices.

3. Charter participants could agree to share information concerning security
   incidents with the ASTF, and if possible, with one another.

4. This could include allowing U.S. government and approved third-party red
   teams and penetration testers to routinely evaluate the security practices of
   Charter participants.

       a. This could be coupled with continuous sharing of results and best
          practices across the Charter participants, coordinated by the ASTF.

5. There is a necessary division of responsibility for security measures between the
   frontier AI labs (i.e., the AI model developers) and their AI cloud providers (i.e.,
   the data center infrastructure providers and AI hardware owners).

       a. The AI cloud providers are responsible for physically securing the
          hardware that runs the AI systems. They are also responsible for securing
          the deepest layers of the software stack (e.g., the virtualization and
          operating systems) against vulnerabilities and attacks [341].

6. Charter participants could agree not to release open-access weights for models
   with a total training compute above the compute reporting threshold (see I.2)
   [86,87,342], and in any case, not to release open-access weights for models that
   fail an agreed-upon set of dangerous capability evaluations that check for
   capabilities such as self-replication, CBRN enablement, and breakout.

7. Charter participants could agree not to sell or share weights for models above
   the compute reporting threshold (see I.2) to any external organization that has
   not itself signed onto the Charter [342].

       a. This is similar to GNU and other copyleft software licenses, where any
          organization that wants to use software released under that license agrees


                                                                              244 of 284
                to itself be bound by the terms of the license. It is also conceptually
                similar to how the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) regime
                for export control operates, except here the commitment would be
                voluntary.

    8. Charter participants could agree to treat the weights of frontier models as highly
       sensitive data, and to be subject to the same restrictions and penalties for
       improperly handling these weights as would apply to personal identifiable
       information (PII).


I.6 Model containment measures123

Charter participants could agree to identify and implement best practices at the
training and deployment stages aimed at minimizing the risk of unanticipated
dangerous model behavior at either stage. Best practices could include identifying and
denying access to information that could contribute to a model’s situational awareness,
emergency shutdown procedures for AI data centers, or continuous monitoring of a
model’s input-output channels. We will refer to this set of safeguards as model
containment measures.124

    1. This could include assessments by the Charter participants of the anticipated
       and possible sensing modalities of AI models prior to the training stage, and
       ongoing reassessments of these modalities as training proceeds.

    2. This could also include clear guidelines for data center security at the cloud
       provider level, such as emergency shutdown measures tied to evaluation
       performance as training progresses. This could include a non-networked power
       cutoff switch for large compute clusters [337].

            a. For each training run above the compute reporting threshold (see I.2),
               there could be a designated role at the AI model developer and at the AI
               cloud provider, with the sole authority to activate a “kill switch” for that
               training run.



123 Several of the recommendations in this section overlap with those in other annexes. Because the

recommendations in this section represent an adaptation of those annexes to the voluntary case, we
have preserved the duplications so that these two sets of recommendations can be read independently.

124 See the Glossary of terms for more information.



                                                                                             245 of 284
     i.     The individuals staffing this role should ideally be technical and
            have received specialized AI safety training. These individuals (at
            least at the AI model developer) could be members of the
            technical AI safety team.
     ii.    The individuals staffing this role could be given access to internal
            evaluations and benchmarks, which their organization should be
            using in addition to public evaluations, and could base their
            decision to activate or not activate a kill switch on this information.
     iii.   This role could be given clear decision making authority in this area
            that cannot be overridden by anyone in its management chain.
     iv.    An individual in this role should ideally not be penalized for
            activating the kill switch prematurely.
     v.     A training restart could be contingent on documented approval of
            an independent panel or of other members of the safety team.
     vi.    All kill switch incidents could also be promptly reported to the
            ASTF. The report could include the reason the kill switch was
            activated, the results of the subsequent investigation, and any
            mitigation measures that were put in place after training was
            restarted. A lab’s decision to resume training after a kill switch has
            been activated could also be reported to the ASTF, along with the
            reasoning for the resumption.
     vii. This role could be modeled on analogous ones in other domains,
          such as the range safety officer with responsibility for triggering the
          flight termination system for rocket launches, or employees at
          Toyota who have a duty to pull the andon cord that stops all
          production if they see a problem [343,344].
b. There could be a similar role, with similar responsibilities and
   characteristics, with the authority to throttle or terminate a model being
   served at the deployment stage.
     i.     As in the case of model evaluations, a fallback model should be in
            place to be brought online automatically when a kill switch is
            activated to support critical customer use cases.
c. As an alternative to the “kill switch” model, AI labs conducting training
   runs or deployments above the compute reporting threshold could
   implement a “dead man switch” model, according to which training or
   deployment is halted at certain checkpoints by default unless a panel



                                                                          246 of 284
             appointed to oversee these activities elects to proceed.


   3. This could also include information-gapping for models by the AI model
      developer and their cloud provider. For example, Charter participants could
      ensure that information pertaining to the model’s own training process, GPU
      capacity, physical data center footprint, data center security measures,
      emergency shutdown procedures, etc., are not available in the training set or
      otherwise accessible by the AI system’s sensing modalities. If possible, this
      information should not be stored electronically, or if it has to be, could be stored
      on separate air-gapped servers [233].

          a. Individuals, both at the frontier lab and cloud provider, who have
             knowledge of these critical model containment measures, could be
             blocked from interacting with instances of the model unless it passes
             certain safety evaluations. (To minimize risk that the model will extract key
             information through its interactions with them.)
          b. The idea is to make this information as challenging as possible to access
             under the model’s known or anticipated sensing modalities.


   4. This could include tailored AI safety training for all employees at both the
      frontier AI labs and relevant roles at the cloud provider. The training could
      encompass extreme risk scenarios, and include periodic surveys to test
      employees’ knowledge and understanding of safety. It may also include agreed
      upon interview practices and principles to filter hires for AI capabilities related
      roles [233].

   5. Charter participants could precommit to specific risk management plans to be
      implemented in the event that particular evaluations or capability predictions
      return certain results. For example, if evaluations suggest that a model exhibits
      concerning persuasive abilities and meets certain situational awareness criteria,
      safeguards might be put in place to prevent staff from interacting with the
      model via an API without supervision, among other things.


I.7 AI safety and AGI alignment research

Charter participants could agree to invest a financial budget (equivalent to, e.g., 20%
of their total compute budget) into (1) scalable AGI alignment efforts; and (2) red
teaming, probing, risk and evaluation research and implementation [5,135].



                                                                                 247 of 284
I.8 Dangerous capability ban

Charter participants could agree to bans against directly training in or fine-tuning for
clearly dangerous capabilities such as deception, persuasiveness, manipulation, CBRN
weapon design, or cyber warfare. Exception could be made if these capabilities are
being investigated for AI safety research purposes (e.g., as part of AI evaluations),
which should only be done under external supervision. In these cases, Charter
participants could agree to report to the ASTF any AI safety research that involves
directly eliciting dangerous capabilities from any AI systems above the compute
reporting threshold (see I.2).

   1. Frontier AI labs theoretically have the capability to train models that could
      directly help them persuade regulators to regulate them more favorably. This
      could represent a new type of vulnerability in the regulatory system, particularly
      in the face of increasingly capable LLMs. A public commitment along these lines
      adds some internal friction to this risk vector, and legally backed whistleblower
      rules could strengthen it further.

   2. Several frontier labs are already exploring training manipulative models for
      internal safety projects, with the goal of preventing manipulation from arising in
      the first place, detecting it, or otherwise blocking it.


I.9 Capability research controls

Charter participants could agree not to publish internal research that supports
dangerous increases in frontier AI capabilities.

   1. Many frontier labs are already reducing the degree of transparency of their AI
      research publications. Releases of technical reports and capability profiling (as
      opposed to more transparent traditional research papers) is now far more
      common for frontier models than it was previously. This is due to the increasing
      commercial value of the research driving increased controls on competitively
      relevant IP. This kind of ban increases the general friction for training frontier AI
      models.

          a. For example, compare the GPT-3 [22] and original PaLM [345] papers to
             the GPT-4 [29] and PaLM 2 [346] technical reports.
          b. The leadership at some of the more safety-conscious frontier labs has
             generally been more reluctant to publish than some of their technical


                                                                                   248 of 284
             employees have. Technical employees frequently care about publication
             record for their reputations and careers, so can often push for more
             openness. Getting the U.S. government to create even an informal norm
             around this could make it more palatable to limit publication.


   2. Publication controls could include:

          a. A process by which AI-related publications are evaluated for safety by
             cleared personnel.
          b. Criteria for defining particular research products as high-risk capabilities
             work. Possible criteria include:
               i.     Work that increases data efficiency.
               ii.    Work that reduces TOPS per loss-increment.
               iii.   Work that makes scaling easier.
               iv.    Performance-enhancing scaling laws along some particular axis of
                      interest.
          c. A structured access scheme to a repository of controlled research, where
             actors who are cleared by the ASTF can access certain kinds of research,
             particularly research that could apply to improve both AI alignment and
             capabilities.
          d. Criteria by which the ASTF could assign access permissions to particular
             research.
          e. Criteria by which research controls could be lifted on a case-by-case basis
             to allow for open publication of research that was previously controlled.


I.10 Risk governance

Charter participants could agree to implement certain risk governance structures
around their core risk management processes. This may include:

   1. Appointing a Chief Risk Officer (CRO) who would be responsible for risk
      management. This person should ideally become a strong counterpart to the
      executives who are responsible for research and product development at each
      lab.




                                                                                  249 of 284
   2. Setting up an internal audit team [230] which would assess the effectiveness of
      the lab’s risk management practices and report any shortcomings to the Board of
      Directors.
   3. Setting up a Board risk committee which would oversee a lab’s risk management
      practices. They would receive risk reports from the CRO and the internal audit
      team.
   4. Implementing a risk management framework such as the Three Lines of Defense
      (3LoD). This could support the lab’s efforts to assign and coordinate different risk
      management roles and responsibilities [231].


I.11 Caps on cloud services for scaled training runs

Charter participants who manage AI cloud platforms could agree to update their terms
of service to prohibit the training of potentially dangerous models on their
infrastructure. See LOE1, 1.5.2 for more information on principles for cloud computing
controls.

   1. For example, Charter participants who manage AI cloud platforms could agree
      to prohibit use of their AI cloud services or hardware to develop models above
      the reporting threshold (see I.2).

   2. Charter participants who manage AI cloud platforms could agree to introduce
      KYC and infrastructure monitoring procedures to enforce these prohibitions.


I.12 Incremental adoption

If necessary, the ASTF could adopt elements of the above Charter incrementally as it
and the Charter participants come to separate agreements on each element.

   1. As one example, the secure temporary storage infrastructure to support third-
      parties’ ability to run private safety evaluations may take time to set up. The
      ASTF could defer implementation of private evaluations until that infrastructure
      has been put in place. Taking the time to establish this infrastructure and
      properly secure Charter participants’ proprietary IP would build trust with
      participants and support mutually escalating commitments. The ASTF could also
      offer Charter participants’ security teams the opportunity to inspect the
      infrastructure and processes that are put in place to protect their IP as a further




                                                                                 250 of 284
      trust-building measure.

   2. The ASTF should also consult with prospective Charter participants on the
      feasibility of each of these measures, keeping in mind the incentives at play at
      each organization. In particular, AI model developers like OpenAI, Anthropic,
      and Inflection AI may have one set of concerns and responsibilities under the
      Charter. AI data center infrastructure providers like Microsoft, Google, Amazon,
      and Flexential may have a different set of concerns and responsibilities.

   3. The ASTF should additionally seek ongoing feedback from the broader AI safety
      and AGI alignment communities on the adequacy of each of the Charter’s
      commitments. See Annex E: Funding in AI safety for additional context on these
      communities.

   4. Additionally, we expect that some of the oversight mechanisms in this Charter
      could turn out to be unworkable or inadequate for reasons that cannot be
      known in advance. An incremental approach that takes into account ongoing
      input from all its stakeholders could allow the ASTF to develop practices that are
      effective under real world conditions. We believe it is crucial for most of this
      iteration to take place in a lower stakes environment under which the parties
      enjoy a basic degree of mutual trust. As AI oversight mechanisms become
      embedded in regulation, legislation, and ultimately international law, they will
      become much more difficult to change. As a result we recommend aiming to
      learn as much as possible from as many mistakes as possible, as early as
      possible. [138] This is similar to the dynamic way in which climate change
      accords have been adopted with increasing mutual trust-building measures
      between the parties [215,258].


I.13 Final considerations for negotiating Charter terms

Ideally the Charter should allow the ASTF, in consultation with the Charter signatories,
to update computing thresholds, or to use thresholding strategies tied to variables
other than compute. For example, capability-based thresholds [347,348] may turn out
to be preferable once it becomes technically possible to better define and measure AI
capabilities. See Annex J: Effective compute for the advantages and limitations of one
such proposal.




                                                                                251 of 284
Annex J: Effective compute

Any compute-based licensing thresholds for AI models (LOE4, 4.1.3.4) would need to
be updated regularly as algorithmic improvements make it possible to build more
performant systems with a fixed compute budget. For this reason, regulators should
monitor the AI research ecosystem for signs of algorithmic breakthroughs that could
significantly affect the relationship between model training compute, inference
compute, and AI capabilities.125

But it may be possible to construct a rough estimate of a model’s effective compute
that attempts to combine raw training compute and algorithmic efficiency into a single
quantity. Effective compute could be estimated with the following procedure:126

   1. Choose a broad-based quantitative benchmark B for a model class. For
      example, the MMLU benchmark for LLMs.

   2. Construct a scaling law for the benchmark B. A scaling law relates the amount of
      compute used to train a model, to that model’s performance on the benchmark
      B.

   3. For any new model M whose effective compute is to be estimated, first evaluate
      the model M’s performance on the benchmark B.

   4. Using the above scaling law, look up the model M’s performance on benchmark
      B, and read off the compute value that corresponds to that performance. This
      compute value is model M’s effective compute.

This measure of effective compute is relatively cheap to calculate. But it is also
imperfect in a number of ways and limited in its applicability. First, the chosen
benchmark B may not correlate well with dangerous capabilities of interest under
general conditions. Second, effective compute can be undermined as a measure of




125 See Annex G: Primer on AI and compute for more information.


126 Thanks to the policy and technical teams at Google DeepMind for the suggestions in this annex.



                                                                                            252 of 284
capability, particularly if it is used to set a regulatory threshold.127 And finally, effective
compute is a property of an AI model, so it cannot be used to define regulatory
thresholds for AI hardware owners, data center infrastructure providers, or other
elements of the advanced AI supply chain. For that reason, effective compute cannot
be used on its own as a metric for defining regulatory thresholds. But it could still serve
as one of several indicators of a model’s general capability level.




127 For example, a regulated entity could attempt to fine-tune an otherwise highly capable model to

perform poorly on the specific benchmark used to define effective compute in the context of a
regulatory threshold. This would make the model appear to use less effective compute, allowing it to
circumvent a regulatory threshold defined in those terms.


                                                                                             253 of 284
Annex K: ASTF activities and task-organization

We propose here some activities the ASTF could undertake in support of the two
Sustainment Components of its mission (LOE1, 1.4.1.2 and 1.4.1.3):

    1. Overseeing industry compliance with RADA safeguards, and operating the
       necessary supporting infrastructure; and

    2. Developing recommendations for a future legal regime and regulatory agency in
       support of LOE4.

We also propose one possible task-organization for the ASTF to support its mission
and activities.


K.1 Oversee and support compliance with RADA safeguards

To support this Sustainment Component of its mission, the ASTF could undertake some
of the following activities:

    1. Maintain private, secure registries of key proprietary information shared with it
       under RADA safeguards. Depending on the details of the RADA safeguards,
       these may include, among others, registries of AI labs’ physical data center
       locations, and of the AI hardware mix at each relevant data center; private safety
       evaluations that third parties administer on frontier labs’ AI systems [46]; and a
       secure temporary storage system that holds model weights as sensitive data in
       support of third-party administration of private evaluations.128

    2. Maintain key public information about various aspects of its standards and
       operations. The ASTF could publish this information on its website. Depending
       on the details of the RADA safeguards, this may include, among other elements,
       registries of standardized model cards, public safety evaluations, and security
       standards and access controls. These standards could be developed in
       collaboration with the NIST U.S. AISI. See LOE3, 3.2.2.

    3. Periodically update the RADA reporting and licensing thresholds, and
       communicate those updates to affected stakeholders.

128 See Annex M: Secure temporary storage of model weights for one possible protocol that could

support this activity.


                                                                                          254 of 284
4. If appropriate given the RADA safeguards, coordinate third-party administration
   of public and private AI evaluations, including frontier labs’ responses to reports
   of failed evaluations. Standards for the evaluations could be developed in
   collaboration with the NIST U.S. AISI, DOE, and DHS and could explicitly include
   evaluations aimed at assessing risk from loss of control. DHS support in
   particular may be necessary for the development of CBRN and WMD-related
   evaluations.

5. If appropriate given the RADA safeguards, license independent third parties to
   administer AI evaluations on frontier models. The ASTF could set up an
   application process for third-party evaluators and red teams that request access
   to pre-deployment models for the purpose of developing and administering
   private safety evaluations. These third parties, once approved, could solicit
   evaluation proposals from outside entities, which they may then implement
   themselves. This could also be done in coordination with partners such as the
   U.K. Frontier AI Taskforce [349,350] through the Department of State.
   Independent AI evaluations should ideally be funded by AI developers but the
   evaluators themselves should be selected by the ASTF, to avoid conflicts of
   interest inherent in AI labs choosing their own evaluators. See LOE3, 3.2 for
   more on AI evaluations.

6. Facilitate collaboration between U.S. government agencies, industry, and AI
   model evaluators to identify classified data leaks. In connection with AI
   weaponization, there is a risk that advanced AI models could infer classified
   information purely by triangulating from public data, and that these inferences
   could be inadvertently disclosed to users through their interactions with the
   resulting AI system. Model developers cannot know if a leak has occurred if they
   do not know that the leaked information is classified, so coordination in this area
   is crucial.

7. Support coordination of frontier AI labs and AI cloud providers with U.S.
   government cyber, operational, and physical security efforts, including red
   teaming and penetration testing, and support sharing of learnings and best
   practices.

8. Support coordination of frontier AI labs with the AGI alignment and AI safety
   communities and other security experts to develop and share model
   containment learnings and best practices.




                                                                             255 of 284
    9. Serve, if necessary, as a clearinghouse for technical AGI alignment research and
       other AI safety and security research that could be mutually beneficial between
       stakeholders.129

    10. If an entity engages in frontier AI activities (such as training or deployments of
        dangerous systems) that violate RADA safeguards in ways deemed by the ASTF
        to introduce unacceptable risks to public safety or national security, order the
        entity to cease those activities, assuming that the ASTF has been granted this
        authority.

    11. In the absence of an enforceable set of RADA safeguards for frontier AI
        development, identify further industry partners who could be onboarded onto a
        more limited voluntary agreement or Charter, and initiate relationships with
        them as appropriate (see Annex I: Voluntary Charter for responsible AI). Possible
        candidates could include NVIDIA, xAI [351], Stability AI [352], Meta, and others.
        Identification of candidates could be supported by horizon-scanning efforts
        (LOE1, 1.2).


K.2 Develop recommendations for a legal and regulatory
regime

To support this Sustainment Component of its mission, the ASTF could undertake some
of the following activities:

    1. Establish a working group to understand the complete supply chain for frontier
       AI model training. In particular the ASTF could seek to understand which inputs
       are manufactured in the United States or in allied jurisdictions, and which legal
       and policy mechanisms exist for enacting controls over these inputs on various
       timescales (LOE1, 1.5; LOE5, 5.5) [353,354]. See Introduction, 0.5.1.6 and
       0.5.3.2 for challenges associated with the advanced AI supply chain, and Annex
       G: Primer on AI and compute for information on the relationship between the
       semiconductor and advanced AI supply chains.

    2. Collaborate with AI chip design firms and foundries to understand the feasibility
       and technical timeline for designing hardware safeguards such as (1) a system to
       register and track GPUs with tamper-resistant serial numbers [155]; (2) a GPU


129 This could also help to allay potential antitrust concerns frontier AI labs may have, given that the

ASTF would be a U.S. government-sanctioned entity.


                                                                                                  256 of 284
      memory snapshot and hash system on AI chip hardware [138, 217]; and (3) on-
      chip firmware for remote shutdown. The sooner a process is put in place for
      tracking where GPUs are going, the tighter the bounds that can be put on the
      total stock of untracked compute capacity. This work could also be supported by
      collaborations with federally funded research centers (LOE3, 3.1.2.2).

   3. Create an ongoing process to understand whether requirements under RADA
      safeguards should be expanded, reduced, or changed. The ASTF could also
      establish a mechanism to solicit and receive public and international proposals
      for changes to RADA safeguards. This could be a public engagement effort that
      ties into risk reporting to give the public a better understanding of the risks and
      the opportunity to contribute mitigation ideas.


K.3 ASTF task-organization

Below we propose one possible organizational structure that could support ASTF
mission execution (LOE1, 1.4.1).




                Figure 13. Organizational chart for the AI Safety Task Force.




                                                                                257 of 284
The ASTF could be led by a Director with five immediate reports. Each of these reports
could lead a workstream focused on executing a different element of the ASTF’s
mission across both Sustainment Components (see N.1 and N.2; and LOE1, 1.4.1.2 and
1.4.1.3).

   ● A Capabilities Assessment Team could be responsible for the ASTF’s
     development and implementation of AI model risk assessment strategies,
     including dangerous capability evaluations and capability forecasting. This team
     could coordinate with industry and work closely with and draw WMD-relevant
     expertise from partner organizations such as the Office of the Secretary of
     Defense for Research and Engineering, the Joint Staff, U.S. Strategic Command,
     DHS, DOE, and the NIST U.S. AISI.

   ● A Security Team could support efforts to harden cyber, operational, and
     physical security at frontier AI labs. Core expertise required could include the
     capabilities of the National Security Agency (NSA), the Federal Bureau of
     Investigation (FBI), the Director of National Intelligence (DNI), and the Defense
     Counterintelligence and Security Agency (DCSA).

   ● An AI Safety and Alignment Team could closely monitor developments in
     technical AI safety and analyze their implications for catastrophic AI risks from
     weaponization and loss of control. It could be led by a government technical
     expert from the DOE with staffing by AI alignment researchers with industry
     experience. It could also collaborate with National Science Foundation-funded
     (NSF-funded) research centers with similar focus areas (LOE3, 3.1.2).

   ● A Regulatory Team could develop the ASTF’s recommendations in support of
     follow-on legislative and regulatory action associated with LOE4. It could draw
     expertise from organizations such as the SEC, the Nuclear Regulatory
     Commission (NRC), the Department of State, and the Department of
     Commerce.

   ● A Legal and Administrative Team could advise the Director on legal matters
     and help manage administrative functions such as ASTF’s internal security and
     contracting.




                                                                               258 of 284
The ASTF could also incorporate a sixth workstream if it absorbs the functions of an
AIO (LOE1, 1.2.1):

   ● A Plans Team could perform the ASTF’s forecasting and capacity building
     activities. In particular, it could explore and propose opportunities for
     international collaboration on catastrophic AI risk mitigation, as well as potential
     domestic risk management strategies. It would also be home to the ASTF’s
     horizon-scanning function, and could coordinate with the Department of State
     and the DHS, as well as with industry.




                                                                                259 of 284
Annex L: AI safety and security research topics

Below we list some workstreams and topic areas that could be included in a federally
funded research agenda for advanced AI and AGI safety and security. This list is not
exhaustive and is in no particular order.


L.1 AGI-scalable alignment between AI behaviors and human
values

This research workstream could include:130

   ● Direct research on inner alignment, which would aim to gather evidence of inner
     alignment failure in highly scaled and capable AI systems, and predict these
     failures in advance from descriptions of a planned AI system [81,355].

   ● Research on power-seeking and techniques to mitigate AI systems’ incentives to
     power-seek, or their ability to competently act on these incentives [2,47].

   ● The development of new scalable alignment and scalable supervision
     techniques designed to ensure the safe behavior of AGI systems in regimes
     where these systems may be engaged in recursive self-improvement (RSI). These
     would be successors to current techniques such as RLHF [333], Constitutional AI
     [237], and DPO [238], which may not work effectively for AGI-level systems [84].
     They may include adversarial training paradigms [356], activation or
     representation engineering techniques [357–360], or other novel approaches to
     ensure scalable controllability of AGI.

   ● Technical guarantees of honesty from AI systems, and techniques that minimize
     the discrepancy between a model’s internal representation of the truth, and its
     outputs [361].

   ● Research investigating the extent to which alignment of AGI or superintelligent
     AI systems is technically possible [7].

   ● Agent foundations theory and decision theory, to establish fundamental
     principles on which safe AGI systems can be developed [362–364].


130 See Annex B: The full challenge of AGI alignment for more context.



                                                                              260 of 284
   ● Safety-oriented research into the mathematical foundations of deep learning,
     such as singular learning theory [365].


L.2 Monitoring of AI systems to detect misbehavior and
preempt failures

This research workstream could include:

   ● Transparency techniques that can provide clarity on the inner workings of AI
     models [366–368].

   ● Mechanistic anomaly detection techniques that allow unexpected inputs or
     outputs to be flagged for human review [369].

   ● Techniques that can detect, anticipate or fix so-called “trojan” AI models, which
     behave well in most situations, but which reliably misbehave in certain trigger
     contexts [370].

   ● Interpretable uncertainty techniques, which allow humans to determine when
     advanced AI models are uncertain about their outputs [361].

   ● Hazardous capability removal techniques, which would focus on eliminating
     dishonesty, as well as harmful capabilities that could enable biological or cyber
     attacks [371].

   ● AI capability evaluations that would allow humans to understand what
     capabilities an AI system has. These would include behavioral evaluations, fine-
     tuning based evaluations, interpretability or understanding-based evaluations,
     automated benchmarking, and red teaming practices. Red teaming efforts could
     focus on detecting behavior with potentially dangerous applications, like
     persuasion, planning, RSI, general reasoning, CBRN and cyber weapon design,
     etc. [46]

   ● Sandbox and testbed development to support AI capability evaluations.

   ● AI failure mode forecasting, including by developing AI systems capable of
     predicting the failures of other AI systems.




                                                                               261 of 284
   ● AI capabilities forecasting to understand what capabilities an AI system will have
     based on how it is trained [213].

   ● AI alignment evaluations, aimed at understanding whether an AI system will
     reliably act in a way that is consistent with its stakeholders’ intentions, as well as
     behavioral evaluations on alignment, which could try to infer the goals of an AI
     from its behavior [46].


L.3 Robustness in the face of adversaries and unforeseen
circumstances

This research workstream could include:

   ● Fixes and detection techniques for outer alignment failures, in which the goals
     given to an advanced AI system are misspecified in ways that can be gamed, or
     that lead to harmful behaviors [270,372].

   ● Behavioral guarantees, which would allow developers to ensure that highly
     advanced AI systems will always act in certain predictable ways, even when
     adversarial inputs are introduced [373].


L.4 Hardware-based veri cation

This research workstream could include:

   ● Monitoring and verification schemes for AI inference deployments and training
     runs. This includes efforts aimed at tracking the physical usage of AI chips by
     companies and other entities [217,218,225].

   ● Chip registry schemes which can provide information about the location and
     ownership of large clusters of AI hardware, to serve as the foundation for future
     compute governance regimes [155].

   ● Hardware-enabled mechanisms that could enable trusted verification of training
     compute and data. Trusted execution environments and confidential or multi-
     party computing could allow analysis and execution of model weights without
     revealing the raw weights themselves [213].




                                                                                  262 of 284
                     fi
Annex M: Secure temporary storage of model weights

There is a strong competitive incentive for frontier AI model developers to train their AI
systems specifically to pass known evaluations, without necessarily resolving underlying
safety issues (Introduction, 0.5.1.3 and LOE3, 3.2.1). This means it is important to
maintain a set of private AI evaluations, whose exact protocols are not known to the
AI model developers, to ensure that developers are not incentivized to attempt to pass
evaluations through superficial fine-tuning. These private evaluations should ideally be
administered by independent third-party evaluators (see LOE3, 3.2.1.3).

This need for private evaluations creates a technical security problem. Many types of
evaluations (particularly interpretability-based evaluations) cannot be administered
without direct access to the weights of the AI model being evaluated. To obtain this
access, a third-party evaluator could use the infrastructure of the AI model developer
itself to administer their evaluation. But because the AI model developer controls this
infrastructure, it could observe the evaluation process and learn the details of the
evaluation protocol. This would irreversibly impair the privacy of that evaluation
protocol and its integrity as a risk signal.

Unfortunately there is no practical way to ensure the privacy of an evaluation protocol
under those conditions. Instead, one solution could be for the AI model developer to
make a copy of its model’s weights, and transfer that copy to a server operated by a
trusted body or agency (e.g., LOE1, 1.4; LOE3, 3.1.2; LOE4, 4.1). The trusted agency
could then support temporary secure access to the model weights by third-party
evaluators, and encrypt that copy of the weights once the evaluations have been
completed. But because a second copy of the model weights increases the exfiltration
attack surface for adversaries, a secure protocol for model weight sharing would be
crucial to support such an arrangement.

Below we sketch a protocol that may achieve this goal with a limited degree of security
risk. The protocol’s participants are: (1) a Regulator, who operates the secure server; (2)
a Developer, who uploads the model weights; and (3) an Evaluator, who administers
the private model evaluation.




                                                                                 263 of 284
Secure weight-sharing protocol:131

    1. Regulator generates a one-time instance of an audited (from all sides), signed
       server in a secure setup. (For example, a government cloud provider like AWS or
       Azure.)

    2. Developer encrypts a model weights file.

    3. Developer uploads the encrypted blob to Regulator’s server.

    4. After this upload, Regulator’s server only has single-user, one-time inbound
       Secure Shell Protocol (SSH) access enabled.

    5. Developer shares the key with Evaluator representative. Physical handoff of the
       key is recommended.

    6. Regulator gives server access key to Evaluator; Evaluator accesses and rotates
       key. Regulator can now no longer access its own instance.

    7. Evaluator uses automated server scripts with Developer-provided weights key
       to decrypt the model and run private evaluations against it.

    8. (Optional) Regulator’s server sends high-level telemetry to Developer,
       Evaluator, and Regulator of non-sensitive information on evaluation progress
       and results.

    9. Developer, Evaluator, and Regulator all separately have the ability to send a
       signed request to the cloud provider to terminate the server at the infrastructure
       level. (This is not a request to the server itself.)

    10. Once the evaluations are completed, Evaluator notifies Regulator. Regulator
        terminates the server, deleting the instance of model weights.

Depending on the degree of security required, the secure server could also be housed
on-premises in an air gapped facility, instead of on a cloud provider’s infrastructure.




131 Thanks to Fletcher Heisler for suggesting this protocol.



                                                                                264 of 284
