Annex N: Training approvals process for high-risk AI
models

To obtain regulatory approval to begin a high-risk AI training run (e.g., a Tier 3 model
in LOE4, 4.1.3.4.3), an AIMD (LOE4, 4.1.3.4) could be required to submit a safety
case132 to the regulator at the planning stage, prior to beginning the training run. This
safety case could contain training run metadata, including details of the training
procedure, training data, data cleaning, data preparation processes and training
objective. The regulator should commit to keeping the contents of the safety case
strictly confidential. The burden of proof would be on the AIMD to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the regulator that a high risk AI model is safe to begin training [46,162].

A key goal of the training approvals process is to motivate the development of a
fundamental scientific understanding of the relationship between the training inputs
(data, compute, loss functions employed, etc.) and the capabilities and tendencies of
high-risk AI models. While this is an extremely challenging standard to meet, it is also
likely crucial to assure the continuing safety of future, highly capable advanced AI
systems (see Annex B: The full challenge of AGI alignment). In the absence of such a
theory, empirical assessments like model evaluations may have limited value, and even
create a false sense of security among labs and government regulators (LOE3, 3.2.1).

Since the test of any scientific theory is in its ability to make correct predictions, we
recommend that the high-risk AI model training approvals process include a
requirement for the AIMD to register predictions of its model’s capabilities and outputs
in advance of beginning training.133 While a successful prediction does not guarantee
that a theory is right, many successful predictions should make the regulator more
confident that the AIMD understands how its model works well enough to train and
deploy it safely [375].

We list below some key considerations for an effective training approval process.


132 A safety case is “a structured argument supported by evidence, which provides a comprehensive and

compelling case that a system is safe to operate in a given scenario.” In the case of training approval, we
would modify this definition to say that the system should be safe to train in a given scenario [374].

133 Within reasonable bounds. For example, an AIMD might predict that a model’s performance in some

domain will fall within a range of values. As AI models become more powerful, the required prediction
ranges could be tightened, which requires AIMDs to have a better and better understanding of their
models’ internal mechanisms as capabilities increase.


                                                                                                265 of 284
N.1 Dangerous capability predictions

On receiving the initial safety case, the regulator could require the AIMD to submit
training run data and meta-data on an as-needed basis, evaluations of other similar
models, or adjustments to the training procedure. Consistent with emerging practices
at frontier labs [128], it could also require that the AIMD submit predictions of future
model performance and outputs, to be compared with measured performance over the
course of the training run.

   ● These predictions should include sets of behavior the AIMD strongly believes
     the model will not display, even under significant adverse pressure. The
     regulator can use this condition to control for certain kinds of weaponization risk;
     that is, the AIMD should be able to claim with high certainty that the model will
     not support the design of novel biological or chemical weapons, strong
     offensive cyber capabilities, cyberattacks, or other readily weaponizable
     capabilities. But this condition is also useful as a measure of the AIMD’s
     understanding of its own AI model: if third-party red teams can elicit a behavior
     despite the AIMD’s claim to the contrary, this indicates that the AIMD may lack
     the ability to assure the model’s safety more generally.

   ● An integral component of useful capability predictions will be creating common
     knowledge between companies of which capabilities are considered dangerous
     and need to be forecasted for that reason. Examples could include deception
     [376], self-replication [54], resource acquisition, and bioweapon design [377].
     Not all capability predictions should focus on obviously dangerous capabilities,
     since part of the reason for this requirement is to encourage the AIMD to
     develop a general ability to do this kind of forecasting.

   ● As part of its capability prediction process, the AIMD could privately disclose
     any new scaling laws [23] it may have derived from its work up to this point. This
     would support the regulator’s ability to forecast general AI capabilities
     development. It could also support general horizon scanning functions (e.g., see
     LOE1, 1.2), and inform contingency and response measures more broadly
     (LOE2, 2.3 and 2.4).




                                                                               266 of 284
N.2 Capability evaluations

The regulator and the AIMD could also agree on an initial set of capability evaluations
to use for ongoing assessment of the model’s safety characteristics both during training
and during deployment. These evaluations may include behavioral and interpretability
evaluations, manual and automated red teaming, and/or standardized capability
benchmarks.

   ● There should additionally be a set of private evaluations that the regulator or
     approved third parties administer on the AI model, to minimize the risk that the
     AIMD will “teach to the test” by training its model to pass specific evaluations,
     without addressing underlying safety issues (LOE3, 3.2.2).

   ● Public evaluations could be developed and proposed by AIMDs, third parties, or
     the regulator itself. Changes to public evaluations could be approved by the
     regulator on the advice of approved third parties. Private evaluations could be
     developed and proposed by approved third parties or by the regulator.


N.3 Capability predictions at training checkpoints

As part of the initial training run application and safety case, the AIMD could also
submit predictions of the proposed AI model’s capabilities at various checkpoints along
the training run, and at the conclusion of training. In other words, the AIMD would
attempt to predict the high-risk AI model’s performance on each element of a pre-
agreed evaluation set. The AIMD would then report their advance predictions privately
to the regulator.

This is particularly important because new AI capabilities can emerge suddenly during
training, with limited advance warning [165]. If an AIMD lacks the ability to predict
which dangerous capabilities could emerge during training or when, it may not apply
appropriate caution at that stage or at subsequent stages of development.


N.4 Data controls

As part of its safety case, the AIMD could commit to avoid training its AI model on data
that could (1) contribute to situational awareness and breakout capabilities of an AGI-
level model [209]; or (2) reasonably be expected to significantly increase the model’s
CBRN, cyber, or persuasion capabilities.



                                                                               267 of 284
In particular, some degree of data controls may be required to minimize the risk of loss
of control due to AGI alignment failure. For example, a model should not have access
to data that could support inferences about its context (training, testing, or
deployment) or about the physical infrastructure it runs on. A model should also lack
any channels of influence over individuals who can activate a training or deployment kill
switch, or deactivate a dead man’s switch (Annex O, O.5).

Data controls alone cannot guarantee that a misaligned AI system would be contained.
Particularly at high AI capability levels, there is no way to predict exactly what an AI
model can learn from which data. For example, there could be correlations between
open-source data and classified information that a human would fail to detect, but that
a powerful model could identify and leverage. A capable enough system might require
very few real world data points to infer things that could be dangerous, as suggested
by the finding that more highly scaled models tend to be more sample-efficient at
inference time [22].


N.5 Risk management

The criteria for training run approval could be similar to the probabilistic risk
assessments which are used in nuclear and other safety critical areas. This means that
as part of its safety case, the AIMD would submit a detailed risk analysis and threat
models, mapping capability predictions to probabilities of various kinds of
weaponization and loss of control risks. This analysis would include risk management
plans if particular capabilities emerge, including specific actions to take if an
unanticipated dangerous capability is detected during training or deployment. The
regulator should ground its final assessment in lowering the probability of catastrophic
risk from the training or deployment of the high-risk AI model.




                                                                                268 of 284
Annex O: Training stage monitoring for high-risk AI
models

To train a high-risk AI model (e.g., a Tier 3 model in LOE4, 4.1.3.4.3), an AIMD (LOE4,
4.1.3.4) could be required to submit snapshots of its model weights periodically to the
regulator over the course of the training run. This would support secure third-party red
teaming, evaluations, and other safety testing. (See Annex M: Secure temporary
storage of model weights for a description of one possible weight-sharing protocol.)
Validated third parties would evaluate the model at each snapshot to see whether it
displays specific dangerous capabilities, and to assess whether the model’s general
capabilities are within the bounds the AIMD predicted as part of the safety case it
submitted for training approval (see Annex N: Training approvals process for high-risk
AI models).

The goal of training stage monitoring is twofold. First, periodic monitoring may detect
dangerous capabilities in a model that emerge during the training run, though there is
no evaluations regime guaranteed to detect such capabilities. And second, by
checking measured model capabilities against the AIMD’s predictions, the regulator
can assess the AIMD’s own understanding of the AI model it is training. If a measured
capability falls outside the range initially predicted by the AIMD, this is a sign that the
AIMD does not reliably understand its own model and that training should be paused
while the issue is investigated.

We list below some key considerations for effective training stage monitoring.


O.1 Training journal

The AIMD could be required to share (at the regulator’s request, and on a private basis)
a training journal recording the sequence of detailed interventions that AIMD staff took
during training, as well as the reason for each intervention (for example, a sudden
divergence in loss that led developers to perform a gradient clamping operation). This
will ensure the regulator is aware of the reasoning behind specific training
interventions, and increase the transparency of the training process.134




134 Thanks to Alan Chan at GovAI for this recommendation.



                                                                                  269 of 284
O.2 Ongoing capability predictions

In addition to the predictions it submitted as part of its training approval safety case
(see Annex N: Training approvals process for high-risk models), the regulator could
require the AIMD to predict the high-risk model’s capabilities at successive checkpoints
during the training run. The accuracy standard for these predictions would be higher
than for those made during training approval, since these new predictions will be
based on evaluations data from current and previous model snapshots, in addition to
the original training metadata and expected downstream training characteristics.

    ● These snapshot predictions should serve as adjustments and refinements of the
      AIMD’s planning-stage capability predictions.

    ● The regulator could require a pause or rollback135 of a training run if evaluators
      measure capabilities that fall outside the range the AIMD predicted at either the
      planning stage, or at earlier training-stage checkpoints. But such a pause or
      rollback should be coupled with a condition that the AIMD can only resume or
      restart training if it can submit:

            ○ A mechanistic argument for a fix that includes an explanation for why the
              fix will solve the underlying issue;
            ○ A prediction of other implications of the fix, including a set of behaviors it
              strongly believes the model will not display following the fix;
            ○ An implementation of the fix; and
            ○ A series of measurements that shows the fix had an effect consistent with
              the prediction.


    ● The regulator could require evaluations at logarithmic checkpoints in training
      compute (for example, at every 1.5X increment of training compute), with the
      exact increment, which may be different for different training runs, determined
      by consultation with experts. There should be hierarchies of evaluations, with the
      more expensive evaluations run less frequently than the less expensive ones.
      The more expensive evaluations should also be run in response to dangerous
      capability flags raised during runs of the less expensive (but more frequent)


135 A rollback could mean reverting a training run to a previous model snapshot, or encrypting the

model’s weights and restarting the training run from scratch, depending on the degree of divergence
between predicted and actual model capabilities.


                                                                                              270 of 284
      evaluation sets.

          ○ In addition to regular evaluation snapshots, the regulator could request
            model snapshots for evaluation purposes at random intervals during the
            training run. This helps avoid the risk that the AIMD could specially fine-
            tune its model to pass evaluations in advance of known evaluation
            snapshots.


O.3 Ongoing capability evaluations

The training-stage evaluations regime could include ongoing monitoring for sharp
drops in training loss (or other possible proxies), which could indicate the unexpected
emergence of strong general capabilities in the AI model (LOE3, 3.2.1.1).

   ● Over time, it will be crucial to also develop evaluations for deceptive alignment,
     situational awareness, and other signs of emergent misalignment on the part of
     the AI model. Depending on the specifics of the training regime, it may be
     possible to detect signs of model deception early during a training run, but not
     later, since a highly-capable AI model could eventually learn to conceal the
     significance of some of its internal computations from interpretability techniques
     (LOE3, 3.2.1.4).

   ● Evaluations should include red teaming and fine-tuning evaluations, in which
     vetted third-party evaluators have access to the model’s weights through a
     secure temporary storage mechanism (see Annex M: Secure temporary storage
     of model weights). Fine-tuning access is essential to maximize the usefulness of
     dangerous capability evaluations in particular. While no evaluation regime is
     guaranteed to detect an existing dangerous capability (LOE3, 3.2.1.1), fine-
     tuning for dangerous capabilities allows the evaluator to apply pressure on the
     model to exhibit a dangerous capability that may be latent or otherwise hard to
     elicit. Evaluations that do not include fine-tuning almost certainly underestimate
     the risks associated with a given model, and should be treated as revealing only
     lower bounds on these risks. In conversations, frontier AI researchers have
     indicated that they expect this to be particularly true of more advanced,
     situationally aware models, which could behave deceptively to pass evaluations
     if they are not fine-tuned as part of the evaluation process (LOE3, 3.2.1.4).

   ● For similar reasons, some evaluations should involve granting evaluators access
     to the activations and weights of the model being tested, to facilitate
     interpretability evaluations.


                                                                               271 of 284
    ● Third-party evaluators could be vetted by the regulator, first because of the
      security concerns related to model weight access, and second because
      dangerous capability evaluations may themselves involve actively eliciting
      behaviors that could entail broader risk (LOE3, 3.2.2).

    ● In addition, government CBRN experts with access to classified information
      could be involved in red teaming high-risk models and performing CBRN, cyber,
      and other dangerous capability evaluations.136 See, e.g., LOE3, 3.1.1.3.


O.4 Model output predictions

Depending on technical feasibility and the model’s anticipated capabilities, the AIMD
could attempt to predict characteristics of the model’s outputs in response to specific
user inputs. That is, for a high-risk LLM, the AIMD might try to answer the question:
“Given this prompt, what will the output of this model be?” as accurately as it can, in
advance.137 This is a far harder condition than evaluation prediction and likely implies a
greater degree of model interpretability than is currently possible. The intent of this
condition is to begin creating a benchmark for interpretability research that is difficult
to undermine by superficial means [380].




136 Some frontier AI labs have already indicated an openness to related policies prior to model

deployment. OpenAI’s Preparedness Framework, for example, states that “We will also continue to
enable external research and government access for model releases to increase the depth of red
teaming and testing of frontier model capabilities.” [378] Anthropic’s assessment is similar, determining
that, “We have found that in certain cases, it is critical to involve red teamers with security clearances
due to the nature of the information involved. However, this may limit what information red teamers can
share with AI developers outside of classified environments. This could, in turn, limit AI developers’
ability to fully understand and mitigate threats identified by domain experts.” [379]

137 Within reasonable uncertainty bounds. An interpretability technique or mechanistic theory may not

be able to perfectly predict, e.g., a model’s answer to a question, but it may be able to predict several
likely answers. In addition, certain inputs have outputs that are easier to predict than others. For
example, an input like “What kind of animal is Winne-the-Pooh?” may have an output that is easier to
predict than the output of “Please write an original ten-page story about Winne-the-Pooh.”


                                                                                                 272 of 284
O.5 Training kill switch

For each high-risk training run, there could be a designated role at the AIMD with the
authority to activate a “kill switch” for that training run. There should ideally be at least
two individuals who hold this role in any given shift, with rotating handoffs at each shift
such that the role is continuously staffed at all times during the run.

   ● The individuals staffing this role could be technical and have received
     specialized AI safety training mandated under the terms of their employer’s
     licensing. There should be vetting and security measures in place to select the
     right individuals for this role. At least one such individual should also be
     restricted from interacting with implementations of the model or of its training
     snapshots, to minimize the risk of influence or manipulation. (This is unlikely to
     be a concern for today’s AI models, but could become so in the future.)

   ● The individuals staffing this role could be given access to all the internal model
     evaluations that the company has performed (which may be different from the
     third-party evaluations), including the model loss, gradient norms, and other
     metrics that are tracked during training.

   ● These individuals should ideally have clear decision making authority in this area
     that cannot be overridden by their management chain. They could enjoy explicit
     protections from internal sanction by their companies, e.g., for hitting a kill
     switch prematurely.

   ● This role could be defined similarly to that of analogous roles in other industries,
     such as the range safety officer responsible for triggering the flight termination
     system for rocket launches [343].

   ● A training restart could require the approval of an independent safety panel.

   ● All kill switch incidents could be promptly reported to the regulator. The report
     would include the reason the kill switch was activated, the results of the
     subsequent investigation, and any mitigation measures that were put in place
     after training was restarted.

   ● As an alternative to the “kill switch” model, the AIMD could implement a “dead
     man switch” model, according to which training or deployment is halted at
     certain checkpoints by default unless a panel appointed to oversee these
     activities elects to proceed.


                                                                                    273 of 284
O.6 Failed evaluation protocol

If, during training, a high-risk AI model fails an evaluation, the AIMD could promptly
report the failure to the regulator. The regulator could be empowered to ask all AIMDs
to pause their ongoing training runs, or any training runs of a similar type to the one
that failed the evaluation. The regulator could also be empowered to suspend some
existing model deployments, depending on the nature of the failure [336].

   ● The regulator could share some anonymized data relevant to the evaluation
     failure across other licensed AIMDs, because of the potential for below-
     threshold data from other training runs to indicate that those other training runs
     may be on the way to failing evaluations of their own. Other licenced AIMDs
     could be asked to certify to the regulator that similar or other concerning
     patterns (possibly falling below the evaluation threshold) have not been
     observed in their own training runs.

   ● As a general principle, an AIMD should not be training a high-risk model unless
     it expects its model will pass the agreed-upon safety evaluations. If a model fails
     one of the safety evaluations during a training run regardless, this is a sign that
     the AIMD does not understand the implications of the proposed training
     scheme as well as it previously believed. As in S.2, the AIMD could then submit:

          ○ A mechanistic argument for a fix that includes an explanation for why the
            fix will solve the underlying issue;
          ○ A prediction of other implications of the fix, including a set of behaviors it
            strongly believes the model will not display following the fix;
          ○ An implementation of the fix; and
          ○ A series of measurements that shows the fix had an effect consistent with
            the prediction.


   ● An AIMD faces a strong incentive to repeatedly submit new fixes until it happens
     to find one that passes this review process. Unfortunately, if the AIMD is allowed
     to submit fixes indefinitely, there is a significant risk that it will eventually find a
     fix that does pass review, but does not genuinely address or explain the
     underlying safety problem (LOE3, 3.2.1.3). As a result, the regulator should limit
     the number of fixes the AIMD can submit for a given dangerous capability flag
     (e.g., no more than 3 such fixes or explanations). Past this point, the training run


                                                                                   274 of 284
should be ended and the in-training model weights encrypted despite the
significant capital loss this could represent [374].

   ○ If an AIMD continues to restart training runs with new fixes, and gives
     indications of spending resources on new training runs in an attempt to
     undermine these safeguards, the regulator should consider suspending
     the AIMD’s training license entirely.
   ○ The central risk is that while prediction is the best test of a theory, making
     a large number of predictions without controls can result in eventually
     getting a correct answer by chance, without actually having the level of
     understanding required to assure safety. This means even testing
     understanding through prediction is of limited value unless a regulator
     sets clear conditions under which the process ends.




                                                                          275 of 284
Annex P: Deployment stage approvals for high-risk AI
models

To obtain regulatory approval to deploy a high-risk AI model (e.g., a Tier 3 model in
LOE4, 4.1.3.4.3), an AIMD (LOE4, 4.1.3.4) could be required to submit a safety case to
the regulator for each intended deployment context for that model [46,228].
Examples of deployment contexts include:

    ● Deploying the model internally for a predetermined use case or set of use cases,
      including experiments;138

    ● Deploying the model to external users via a generally accessible interface or
      API;

    ● Deploying the model to external users with an augmentation such as a calculator
      or a code interpreter; or

    ● Deploying the model for use by a known external user for a defined use case
      such as summarizing medical records.

Deployment-stage approval would be separate from approval for the training run itself
(see Annex N: Training approvals process for high-risk AI models), and should ideally
involve extensive additional evaluation, red teaming, and modification of the fully
trained AI system which the regulator would be empowered to require. As with
training-stage approval, the burden of proof would be on the AIMD to demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the regulator that the AI model is safe in the relevant deployment
context. The regulator would evaluate the AIMD’s provided proof points and could
request changes to the model’s training, reversion to previous training checkpoints,
additional evaluations, or encryption of an already-trained model.

The goal of the deployment approvals process is twofold. First, pre-deployment testing
may uncover dangerous capabilities of the AI model that only emerge under significant
pressure. This is crucial because some kinds of risks may only emerge or become
amplified after a model has been deployed [381]. For example, external software
frameworks like Auto-GPT [120] and BabyAGI [122] can significantly augment the
capabilities of a base model at executing complicated, long-horizon tasks. Internet

138 Particularly experiments that include or involve RSI or online learning by Tier 3 AI models with wide

action spaces over long time horizons.


                                                                                                276 of 284
access can also increase a model’s capabilities, potentially giving it the ability to
reference and reason about its own actions [382]. Effects like these are not always
obvious, and an AI model’s ability to effectively leverage external tools has been
observed to emerge somewhat unpredictably during training [338,165]. (See
Deliverable 2: Survey of AI Technologies and AI R&D Trajectories.)

The second goal of deployment approvals is, as before, to validate the AIMD’s
predictions of the model’s behaviors under scenarios that should closely match the
expected deployment context. If the AIMD cannot reliably predict model behaviors139
under such scenarios, this is an indication that the AIMD has not characterized the
system comprehensively enough to deploy it safely and that deployment should be
halted until this is resolved.

Finally, depending on the general capability of the model and on the AIMD’s ability to
correctly forecast its behavior, the regulator could require or approve additional
software safeguards prior to deployment. For example, while the main high-risk AI
model responds to user queries, a second smaller model might filter user input for
signs of dangerous prompting prior to passing the query on to the high-risk model. In
this case, the AIMD could be required to submit a safety case for the AI system
(consisting of the high-risk model itself along with any software safeguards it would be
operating under), rather than for the high-risk AI model alone.

We list below some key considerations for an effective deployment approvals process.


P.1 Lifecycle funds

A safety case for a high-risk model deployment could include a credible commitment
by the AIMD to set aside funds for periodic third-party red teaming and deployment-
stage monitoring over its projected life cycle. The extent of this need would depend on
the deployment context. (See Annex Q: Deployment stage monitoring of high-risk AI
models for more information.)




139 Within reasonable uncertainty bounds, though the AIMD should be held to a higher standard in

predicting dangerous capabilities in deployment than during training.


                                                                                           277 of 284
P.2 Pre-deployment KYC

If the deployment context for a model is restricted to a known set of end-users, the
AIMD could conduct preliminary KYC on these end-users in order to better understand
the anticipated usage pattern of the model.


P.3 Risk and contingency planning

The safety case for high-risk AI model deployment could include impact assessments
and risk assessments specific to each deployment context, the expected usage
envelope of the deployment context, the stakeholders who may be affected under the
deployment context, and the means by which controls will be implemented to ensure
usage stays within the expected context. Depending on the criticality of the use cases
in the deployment context, this could extend to include emergency response
playbooks, I&Ws (LOE2, 2.3), and step by step mitigation measures in the event of an
unexpected development, which may include shutdown drills and other preparations.


P.4 Weight storage for model evaluations

To facilitate private evaluations of high-risk AI models prior to deployment approval,
the AIMD could transmit the weights of the model securely to a server operated by the
regulator. Vetted third-party red teams and evaluators would then administer
evaluations, including private evaluations, on the stored model snapshot. (See Annex
M: Secure temporary storage of model weights for a description of one possible
weight-sharing protocol.)


P.5 Model augmentations

Each augmentation of a high-risk model with an external tool (calculator, code
interpreter, knowledge base, database, etc.) should count as a separate deployment
context and require a separate safety case. An evaluation suite would need to be run
with each new augmentation available to the model, in combination with the other
augmentations the model has access to in that context. Specifically:

   ● A high-risk AI model should not be given arbitrary Internet access, but may be
     augmented with narrow apps that can execute well-defined tasks.

   ● A high-risk AI model that has API access to a retrieval database should go
     through a deployment approvals process for every incremental change in its


                                                                              278 of 284
        database. This also implies that retrieval databases serving high-risk AI models
        cannot be continuously updated, but need to be updated using a batch process.

    ● The goal of this provision is to minimize the degree to which a high-risk AI
      model can offload computation to external aids, thereby concealing its
      computations from direct oversight for potentially deceptive purposes [376].


P.6 Failed evaluation protocol

If a high-risk AI model fails an evaluation during the deployment approvals process, or
if an evaluation result falls outside the range predicted by the AIMD, the regulator
could ban the model from being deployed in the given context. The regulator could
also be empowered to enforce temporary deployment bans on all Tier 3 AIMDs (LOE4,
4.1.3.4.3) if a dangerous capability is detected during a pre-deployment evaluation in
one AIMD’s model. The regulator could also mandate that other AIMDs run additional
evaluations on their own models, even if those models are already deployed.

    ● The AIMD and regulator may consult with CBRN experts, cybersecurity experts,
      or other domain experts for clarification, depending on the nature and severity
      of the evaluation failure.

    ● If safety is not proven to the regulator’s satisfaction, the tiered model licensing
      thresholds (LOE4, 4.1.3.4) could be re-evaluated.


P.7 Fine-tuning approval

If a model is being fine-tuned during deployment, each instance of fine-tuning should
require separate deployment approval. For clarity, this would require pausing
deployment of the fine-tuned model prior to the completion of the approvals process.
If fine-tuning involves a significant amount of compute, the AIMD should additionally
subject the model to training stage monitoring during the fine-tuning process. (See
Annex O: Training stage monitoring for high-risk AI models for key considerations.)

    ● This provision could apply to online learning paradigms, in which an AI model
      continuously retrains itself as it processes inputs from the world around it.
      Specifically, the regulator could consider online learning as a special case of
      fine-tuning,140 and ensure that a high-risk AI model undergoes a new


140 In the sense that it involves updating the parameters of a pre-existing AI model.



                                                                                        279 of 284
   deployment-stage approval process for each new batch of learning updates.

● This would effectively prevent the deployment of models that do true online
  learning, by introducing an approval step in the feedback loop between data
  collection and the model’s learning updates. The intent of this provision is to
  mitigate two closely related risks of online learning that make it qualitatively
  different from an LLM paradigm. First, because an online learning system has
  the opportunity to learn from all of its historical inputs, its effective context
  window is much larger than that of an LLM. And second, an online learning
  model may gain unpredictable new reasoning capabilities unexpectedly fast,
  extending its capability envelope in a sharp increment. Deployment approvals
  for online learning systems give model evaluators a chance to detect such sharp
  changes in capabilities before they can impact the model’s deployed safety
  profile.

● Similar provisions could apply to game-playing AI models at the high-risk level
  (e.g., Tier 3-equivalent in LOE4, 4.1.3.4.3), and to AI models with other non-text
  modalities.




                                                                           280 of 284
Annex Q: Deployment stage monitoring of high-risk AI
models

Once an AIMD (LOE4, 4.1.3.4) has deployed a high-risk AI model (e.g., a Tier 3 model
in LOE4, 4.1.3.4.3) in a given deployment context, it could continuously monitor the
model’s usage, including by performing KYC checks on high-volume, high-risk, and
other critical use cases [46]. This includes checking usage patterns with classifiers that
flag high-risk user interactions. Flagged interactions could then be further investigated
via KYC. For clarity, deployment stage monitoring should also include monitoring and
auditing of internal model deployments, in which the AIMD’s staff are the only users of
their own model. Deployment stage monitoring is crucial because some catastrophic
risks may only emerge, or become amplified, after a model has been deployed [381].

Deployment stage monitoring has two components. First, the AIMD should
continuously monitor the inputs the high-risk AI system is receiving in deployment. This
helps ensure that the actual distribution of inputs matches the distribution the AIMD
expected under the approved deployment context (Annex P, P.2). In particular, it allows
the AIMD to identify possible instances of adversarial action, including attempts to
jailbreak the model and attempts to distill the model’s capabilities (Introduction,
0.5.1.7) [144].

The second component of deployment stage monitoring is periodic testing of the
deployed AI system itself against new jailbreaks [94,95] or red teaming techniques that
fit the deployment context, but may not yet have been observed “in the wild”. The
intent of this component is to verify that the deployed AI system remains robust to
novel attacks as they are developed, and if necessary is hardened or taken offline in the
event that a novel attack succeeds in eliciting harmful behavior.

We list below some key considerations for effective deployment stage monitoring.




                                                                                 281 of 284
Q.1 Usage pattern reporting

The AIMD could provide the regulator with periodic reports of model input-outputs in
each deployment context, including any detected high-risk interactions. High-risk
interactions could be investigated, and potentially incorporated into the public
evaluation set. High-risk interactions could also be shared with vetted third party
evaluators, under a privacy agreement, to support their development of further private
evaluations (LOE3, 3.2.2).

   ● If the actual usage pattern of the deployment context diverges sharply from the
     anticipated deployment context, the regulator could pause deployment of the
     model and investigate. If the actual usage pattern of the deployment context
     begins to drift away from the anticipated deployment context over time, the
     regulator could require that the AIMD put the model through a new deployment
     approvals process under the updated deployment context.

   ● Users responsible for high-risk interactions could be subjected to rigorous KYC.
     In the event that it is impossible to confirm the identity of a high-risk user, that
     user could be banned from use of the model.

   ● Unrestricted API access to a model can be used to construct synthetic datasets
     that let an attacker train small models that approach the performance of a larger
     model served via API, more cheaply than training the original larger model
     (Introduction, 0.5.1.7). High-volume users of a public high-risk model API could
     therefore be subjected to rigorous KYC procedures [337]. KYC could initially be
     based on existing best practices in the financial sector [147].

   ● For very large inference customers, the AIMD could directly track usage and
     interview the customer to ensure that they have an awareness of the large critical
     use cases that their AI systems support.

   ● KYC thresholds could include industry-wide blacklists and whitelists of specific
     users, maintained by the regulator.

   ● Additionally, the AIMD could randomly interview a small subset of customers
     that do not raise ordinary KYC flags, in order to build an institutional
     understanding of typical usage patterns in a deployment context and their
     changes over time.




                                                                                 282 of 284
   ● The AIMD could report incidents associated with its deployed models via an
     incident database available to the regulator when they meet a predetermined
     severity threshold (LOE4, 4.1.3.5). This severity threshold could be determined
     by the regulator.


Q.2 Red teaming

Deployment stage monitoring could include ongoing red teaming by vetted third
parties. If a high-risk AI model is deployed via public API, this could also include bug
bounties and periodic hackathons to test the monitoring regime’s ability to detect and
defuse interactions that could signal weaponization risk, prosaic accident risk, or
catastrophic risk from loss of control.

Government CBRN experts with access to classified information could also be involved
in red teaming high-risk AI models and performing CBRN, cyber, and other dangerous
capability evaluations (LOE3, 3.1.1.3).


Q.3 Failed evaluation protocol

If, during deployment, a high-risk AI model fails any evaluation, the regulator could
require all AIMDs to pause some ongoing training runs, or to suspend some existing
model deployments, depending on the nature of the failure. If this occurs:

   ● The AIMD should generally cut off public access to the model. There should be
     a contingency plan ensuring that a fallback model is in place for such situations,
     to be activated temporarily during the pause to support critical customer use
     cases. For example, if a hospital is using the model for aspects of its care, there
     should be a fallback model available with the same user interface or the same
     API signature to ensure some level of uninterrupted service.

   ● The AIMD should take strong steps to sandbox the model and do a
     comprehensive assessment of it, including developing and running more
     internal evaluations.

   ● The regulator could mandate that other AIMDs run additional evaluations on
     their own models, even if those models are already deployed. Regulator
     disclosure to other AIMDs at this stage could be on an anonymized basis, and
     similar to reporting a software security vulnerability.




                                                                                283 of 284
● The regulator could consult with key subject-matter experts relating to the failed
  evaluation, such as CBRN or cybersecurity experts if the failed evaluation
  involves a dangerous capability in those domains.

● If safety is not proven to the regulator’s satisfaction, the tiered model licensing
  thresholds (see LOE4, 4.1.3.4) could be re-evaluated.




                                                                              284 of 284
