dan@Dans-MacBook-Air The Strategy of Conflict by Thomas C. Schelling EPUB % for f in $(for g in /tmp/soc/text/*.html; do sed 's/<[^>]*>//g' "$g" | grep -q -i "cool-headed" && echo "$g"; done); do
  echo "======== $f ========"
  sed 's/<[^>]*>//g' "$f" | grep -n -i -C 15 "cool-headed"
  echo ""
done
======== /tmp/soc/text/part0000_split_005.html ========
32-   It is not only criminals, however, but our own children that have to be deterred. Some aspects of deterrence stand out vividly in child discipline: the importance of rationality and self-discipline on the part of the person to be deterred, of his ability to comprehend the threat if he hears it and to hear it through the din and noise, of the threatener’s determination to fulfill the threat if need be—and, more important, of the threatened party’s conviction that the threat will be carried out. Clearer perhaps in child discipline than in criminal deterrence is the important possibility that the threatened punishment will hurt the threatener as much as it will the one threatened, perhaps more. There is an analogy between a parent’s threat to a child and the threat that a wealthy paternalistic nation makes to the weak and disorganized government of a poor nation in, say, extending foreign aid and demanding “sound” economic policies or cooperative military policies in return. 
33-   And the analogy reminds us that, even in international affairs, deterrence is as relevant to relations between friends as between potential enemies. (The threat to withdraw to a “peripheral strategy” if France failed to ratify the European Defense Community Treaty was subject to many of the same disabilities as a threat of retaliation.) The deterrence concept requires that there be both conflict and common interest between the parties involved; it is as inapplicable to a situation of pure and complete antagonism of interest as it is to the case of pure and complete common interest. Between these extremes, deterring an ally and deterring an enemy differ only by degrees, and in fact we may have to develop a more coherent theory before we can even say in a meaningful way whether we have more in common with Russia or with Greece, relative to the conflicts between us. [5] 
34-   The deterrence idea also crops up casually in everyday affairs. Automobile drivers have an evident common interest in avoiding collision and a conflict of interest over who shall go first and who shall slam on his brakes and let the other through. Collision being about as mutual as anything can be, and often the only thing that one can threaten, the maneuvers by which one conveys a threat of mutual damage to another driver aggressing on one’s right of way are an instructive example of the kind of threat that is conveyed not by words but by actions, and of the threat in which the pledge to fulfill is made not by verbal announcement but by losing the power to do otherwise. 
35-   Finally, there is the important area of the underworld. Gang war and international war have a lot in common. Nations and outlaws both lack enforceable legal systems to help them govern their affairs. Both engage in the ultimate in violence. Both have an interest in avoiding violence, but the threat of violence is continually on call. It is interesting that racketeers, as well as gangs of delinquents, engage in limited war, disarmament and disengagement, surprise attack, retaliation and threat of retaliation; they worry about “appeasement” and loss of face; and they make alliances and agreements with the same disability that nations are subject to—the inability to appeal to higher authority in the interest of contract enforcement. 
36-   There are consequently a number of other areas available for study that may yield insight into the one that concerns us, the international area. Often a principle that in our own field of interest is hidden in a mass of detail, or has too complicated a structure, or that we cannot see because of a predisposition, is easier to perceive in another field where it enjoys simplicity and vividness or where we are not blinded by our predispositions. It may be easier to articulate the peculiar difficulty of constraining a Mossadeq by the use of threats when one is fresh from a vain attempt at using threats to keep a small child from hurting a dog or a small dog from hurting a child. 
37-   None of these other areas of conflict seems to have been mastered by a well-developed theory that can, with modification, be used in the analysis of international affairs. Sociologists, including those who study criminal behavior in underworld conflict, have not traditionally been much concerned with what we would call the strategy of conflict. Nor does the literature on law and criminology reveal an appreciable body of explicit theory on the subject. I cannot confidently assert that there are no handbooks, textbooks, or original works on the pure theory of blackmail circulating in the underworld; but certainly no expurgated version, showing how to use extortion and how to resist it, has shown up as “New Ways in Child Guidance,” in spite of the demand for it. [6] 
38-   What would “theory” in this field of strategy consist of? What questions would it try to answer? What ideas would it try to unify, clarify, or communicate more effectively? To begin with, it should define the essentials of the situation and of the behavior in question. Deterrence—to continue with deterrence as a typical strategic concept—is concerned with influencing the choices that another party will make, and doing it by influencing his expectations of how we will behave. It involves confronting him with evidence for believing that our behavior will be determined by his behavior. 
39-   But what configuration of value systems for the two participants—of the “payoffs,” in the language of game theory—makes a deterrent threat credible? How do we measure the mixture of conflict and common interest required to generate a “deterrence” situation? What communication is required, and what means of authenticating the evidence communicated? What kind of “rationality” is required of the party to be deterred—a knowledge of his own value system, an ability to perceive alternatives and to calculate with probabilities, an ability to demonstrate (or an inability to conceal) his own rationality? 
40-   What is the need for trust, or enforcement of promises? Specifically, in addition to threatening damage, need one also guarantee to withhold the damage if compliance is forthcoming; or does this depend on the configuration of “payoffs” involved? What “legal system,” communication system, or information structure is needed to make the necessary promises enforceable? 
41-   Can one threaten that he will “probably” fulfill a threat; or must he threaten that he certainly will? What is the meaning of a threat that one will “probably” fulfill when it is clear that, if he retained any choice, he’d have no incentive to fulfill it after the act? More generally, what are the devices by which one gets committed to fulfillment that he would otherwise be known to shrink from, considering that if a commitment makes the threat credible enough to be effective it need not be carried out. What is the difference, if any, between a threat that deters action and one that compels action, or a threat designed to safeguard a second party from his own mistakes? Are there any logical differences among deterrent, disciplinary, and extortionate threats? 
42-   How is the situation affected by a third participant, who has his own mixture of conflict and common interest with those already present, who has access to or control of the communication system, whose behavior is rational or irrational in one sense or another, who enjoys trust or some means of contract enforcement with one or another of the two principals? How are these questions affected by the existence of a legal system that permits and prohibits certain actions, that is available to inflict penalty on nonfulfillment of contract, or that can demand authentic information from the participants. To what extent can we rationalize concepts like “reputation,” “face,” or “trust,” in terms of a real or hypothetical legal system, in terms of modification of the participants’ value systems, or in terms of relationships of the players concerned to additional participants, real or hypothetical? 
43-   This brief sample of questions may suggest that there is scope for the creation of “theory.” There is something here that looks like a mixture of game theory, organization theory, communication theory, theory of evidence, theory of choice, and theory of collective decision. It is faithful to our definition of “strategy”: it takes conflict for granted, but also assumes common interest between the adversaries; it assumes a “rational” value-maximizing mode of behavior; and it focuses on the fact that each participant’s “best” choice of action depends on what he expects the other to do, and that “strategic behavior” is concerned with influencing another’s choice by working on his expectation of how one’s own behavior is related to his. 
44-   There are two points worth stressing. One is that, though “strategy of conflict” sounds cold-blooded, the theory is not concerned with the efficient application of violence or anything of the sort; it is not essentially a theory of aggression or of resistance or of war. Threats of war, yes, or threats of anything else; but it is the employment of threats, or of threats and promises, or more generally of the conditioning of one’s own behavior on the behavior of others, that the theory is about. 
45-   Second, such a theory is nondiscriminatory as between the conflict and the common interest, as between its applicability to potential enemies and its applicability to potential friends. The theory degenerates at one extreme if there is no scope for mutual accommodation, no common interest at all even in avoiding mutual disaster; it degenerates at the other extreme if there is no conflict at all and no problem in identifying and reaching common goals. But in the area between those two extremes the theory is noncommittal about the mixture of conflict and common interest; we can equally well call it the theory of precarious partnership or the theory of incomplete antagonism. [7] (In Chapter 9 it is pointed out that some central aspects of the problem of surprise attack in international affairs are structurally identical with the problem of mutually suspicious partners.) 
46-   Both of these points—the neutrality of the theory with respect to the degree of conflict involved, and the definition of “strategy” as concerned with constraining an adversary through his expectation of the consequences of his actions—suggest that we might call our subject the theory of interdependent decision. 
47:   Threats and responses to threats, reprisals and counter-reprisals, limited war, arms races, brinkmanship, surprise attack, trusting and cheating can be viewed as either hot-headed or coolheaded activities. In suggesting that they can usefully be viewed, in the development of theory, as cool-headed activities, it is not asserted that they are in fact entirely cool-headed. Rather it is asserted that the assumption of rational behavior is a productive one in the generation of systematic theory. If behavior were actually cool-headed, valid and relevant theory would probably be easier to create than it actually is. If we view our results as a bench mark for further approximation to reality, not as a fully adequate theory, we should manage to protect ourselves from the worst results of a biased theory. 
48-   Furthermore, theory that is based on the assumption that the participants coolly and “rationally” calculate their advantages according to a consistent value system forces us to think more thoroughly about the meaning of “irrationality.” Decision-makers are not simply distributed along a one-dimensional scale that stretches from complete rationality at one end to complete irrationality at the other. Rationality is a collection of attributes, and departures from complete rationality may be in many different directions. Irrationality can imply a disorderly and inconsistent value system, faulty calculation, an inability to receive messages or to communicate efficiently; it can imply random or haphazard influences in the reaching of decisions or the transmission of them, or in the receipt or conveyance of information; and it sometimes merely reflects the collective nature of a decision among individuals who do not have identical value systems and whose organizational arrangements and communication systems do not cause them to act like a single entity. 
49-   As a matter of fact, many of the critical elements that go into a model of rational behavior can be identified with particular types of rationality or irrationality. The value system, the communication system, the information system, the collective decision process, or a parameter representing the probability of error or loss of control, can be viewed as an effort to formalize the study of “irrationality.” Hitler, the French Parliament, the commander of a bomber, the radar operators at Pearl Harbor, Khrushchev, and the American electorate may all suffer from some kinds of “irrationality,” but by no means the same kinds. Some of them can be accounted for within a theory of rational behavior. (Even the neurotic, with inconsistent values and no method of reconciling them, motivated to suppress rather than to reconcile his conflicting goals, may for some purposes be viewed as a pair of “rational” entities with distinct value systems, reaching collective decisions through a voting process that has some haphazard or random element, asymmetrical communications, and so forth.) 
50-   The apparent restrictiveness of an assumption of “rational” behavior—of a calculating, value-maximizing strategy of decision—is mitigated by two additional observations. One, which I can only allege at second hand, is that even among the emotionally unbalanced, among the certified “irrationals,” there is often observed an intuitive appreciation of the principles of strategy, or at least of particular applications of them. I am told that inmates of mental hospitals often seem to cultivate, deliberately or instinctively, value systems that make them less susceptible to disciplinary threats and more capable of exercising coercion themselves. A careless or even self-destructive attitude toward injury—”I’ll cut a vein in my arm if you don’t let me. . .”—can be a genuine strategic advantage; so can a cultivated inability to hear or to comprehend, or a reputation for frequent lapses of self-control that make punitive threats ineffectual as deterrents. (Again I am reminded of my children.) As a matter of fact, one of the advantages of an explicit theory of “rational” strategic decision in situations of mixed conflict and common interest is that, by showing the strategic basis of certain paradoxical tactics, it can display how sound and rational some of the tactics are that are practiced by the untutored and the infirm. It may not be an exaggeration to say that our sophistication sometimes suppresses sound intuitions, and one of the effects of an explicit theory may be to restore some intuitive notions that were only superficially “irrational.” 
51-   The second observation is related to the first. It is that an explicit theory of “rational” decision, and of the strategic consequences of such decisions, makes perfectly clear that it is not a universal advantage in situations of conflict to be inalienably and manifestly rational in decision and motivation. Many of the attributes of rationality, as in several illustrations mentioned earlier, are strategic disabilities in certain conflict situations. It may be perfectly rational to wish oneself not altogether rational, or—if that language is philosophically objectionable—to wish for the power to suspend certain rational capabilities in particular situations. And one can suspend or destroy his own “rationality,” at least to a limited extent; one can do this because the attributes that go to make up rationality are not inalienable, deeply personal, integral attributes of the human soul, but include such things as one’s hearing aid, the reliability of the mails, the legal system, and the rationality of one’s agents and partners. In principle, one might evade extortion equally well by drugging his brain, conspicuously isolating himself geographically, getting his assets legally impounded, or breaking the hand that he uses in signing checks. In a theory of strategy, several of these defenses can be represented as impairments of rationality if we wish to represent them so. A theory that makes rationality an explicit postulate is able not only to modify the postulate and examine its meaning but to take some of the mystery out of it. As a matter of fact, the paradoxical role of “rationality” in these conflict situations is evidence of the likely help that a systematic theory could provide. 
52-   And the results reached by a theoretical analysis of strategic behavior are often somewhat paradoxical; they often do contradict common sense or accepted rules. It is not true, as illustrated in the example of extortion, that in the face of a threat it is invariably an advantage to be rational, particularly if the fact of being rational or irrational cannot be concealed. It is not invariably an advantage, in the face of a threat, to have a communication system in good order, to have complete information, or to be in full command of one’s own actions or of one’s own assets. Mossadeq and my small children have already been referred to; but the same tactic is illustrated by the burning of bridges behind oneself to persuade an adversary that one cannot be induced to retreat. An old English law that made it a serious crime to pay tribute to coastal pirates does not necessarily appear either cruel or anomalous in the light of a theory of strategy. It is interesting that political democracy itself relies on a particular communication system in which the transmittal of authentic evidence is precluded: the mandatory secret ballot is a scheme to deny the voter any means of proving which way he voted. Being stripped of his power to prove how he voted, he is stripped of his power to be intimidated. Powerless to prove whether or not he complied with a threat, he knows—and so do those who would threaten him—that any punishment would be unrelated to the way he actually voted. 
53-   The well-known principle that one should pick good negotiators to represent him and then give them complete flexibility and authority—a principle commonly voiced by negotiators themselves—is by no means as self-evident as its proponents suggest; the power of a negotiator often rests on a manifest inability to make concessions and to meet demands. [8] Similarly, while prudence suggests leaving open a way of escape when one threatens an adversary with mutually painful reprisal, any visible means of escape may make the threat less credible. The very notion that it may be a strategic advantage to relinquish certain options deliberately, or even to give up all control over one’s future actions and make his responses automatic, seems to be a hard one to swallow. 
54-   Many of these examples involve some denial of the value of skill, resourcefulness, rationality, knowledge, control, or freedom of choice. They are all, in principle, valid in certain circumstances; but seeing through their strangeness and comprehending the logic behind them is often a good deal easier if one has formalized the problem, studied it in the abstract, and identified analogies in other contexts where the strangeness is less of an obstacle to comprehension. 
55-   Another principle contrary to the usual first impression concerns the relative virtues of clean and dirty bombs. Bernard Brodie has pointed out that when one considers the special requirements of deterrence, in contrast to the requirements of a war that one expects to fight, one may see some utility in the super-dirty bomb. [9] As remarked in Chapter 10, this conclusion is not so strange if we recognize the “balance of terror” as simply a massive modern version of an ancient institution, the exchange of hostages. 
56-   Here perhaps we perceive a disadvantage peculiar to civilized modern students of international affairs, by contrast with, say, Machiavelli or the ancient Chinese. We tend to identify peace, stability, and the quiescence of conflict with notions like trust, good faith, and mutual respect. To the extent that this point of view actually encourages trust and respect it is good. But where trust and good faith do not exist and cannot be made to by our acting as though they did, we may wish to solicit advice from the underworld, or from ancient despotisms, on how to make agreements work when trust and good faith are lacking and there is no legal recourse for breach of contract. The ancients exchanged hostages, drank wine from the same glass to demonstrate the absence of poison, met in public places to inhibit the massacre of one by the other, and even deliberately exchanged spies to facilitate transmittal of authentic information. It seems likely that a well-developed theory of strategy could throw light on the efficacy of some of those old devices, suggest the circumstances to which they apply, and discover modern equivalents that, though offensive to our taste, may be desperately needed in the regulation of conflict. 
57-   
58- 
59-    
60-  

======== /tmp/soc/text/part0000_split_013.html ========
49-   Take an example. A European country, having acquired a modest nuclear retaliatory force, tells the Russians to get out of Hungary or it will work terrible damage on the USSR. The Russians ignore the threat, since there is no persuasive way for the threatening country to make itself have to do anything so suicidal. Alternatively, the country threatens to send a missile a day over the USSR, with a nuclear weapon and a random device that explodes it somewhere over Russia if it hasn’t been shot down. The Russians say they do not believe the country would do it; the country does it. The Russians protest and threaten, a day passes, the country does it again. Maybe one weapon gets through and detonates, maybe several do, maybe none do; if some do, maybe they burst over cities, maybe over populated countryside, maybe over deserted areas. The country keeps it up. 
50-   What is the country doing? The principal thing the country is doing—in addition to damaging or humiliating Russia—is incurring a painful risk that both it and Russia (and the rest of the world) will be engaged in all-out war in the near future, a war that neither it nor Russia wants. The country is saying in effect, “If you do not get out of Hungary, we may cause an all-out war to occur.” By when must the Russians get out? The sooner they get out, the sooner the risk of war (from this cause) will be terminated or reduced. The country applying the pressure is not saying, “Get out or we shall deliberately start a war.” The decision is not up to them, and does not depend on their displaying the manifest resolution for a final act. The Russians may suppose that the country concerned will do everything it can to prevent total war; but they also have to recognize that with these things flying around, exploding now and then, and with themselves responding in whatever way they feel obliged to, it is not altogether clear that the country concerned, and the Russians, know how to keep total war from occurring. 
51-   This illustration is intended just as an analogy for other actions in which posing a risk of all-out war may not be so recognizable as an integral part of what is happening. To take a more immediate situation, suppose an armored column were sent to Berlin in the event that ground access were denied, or suppose, once a transport squeeze on Berlin became intolerable, troops were sent in to claim and hold a corridor; suppose actions were taken that, whether intended to or not, generated some likelihood of an East German uprising. How do we analyze the nature of the pressure on the Russians? I think the answer is in large part that they are confronted with a risk of a war that both sides badly want not to occur, but that both sides may not be able to prevent. A rationale for direct action, even on a scale that by itself might accomplish little, could be the deliberate creation of a risk that we share with the Russians, providing them with the option either to terminate the risk by acting or to withdraw to meet our objectives. 
52-   This is not the only interpretation of such action, of course. It may be that we could win militarily if the fight stays on a small scale, and that for the Russians to enlarge it would require a discontinuous jump that they would be deterred from taking for fear of provoking a discontinuous response. In that case the initial limited war would contain a “deterrent” threat against enlargement of the war. Even so, an important reason why the threat of even small-scale war might be effective is that such a war promises a small but appreciable increase in the probability of an enormous war, the probability being small enough that the Russians believe the West could bring itself to create it, large enough to make it unprofitable for them to let it occur. [108] 
53-   It is worth noting that this interpretation suggests that the threat of limited war may be potent even when there is little expectation that we would win it. In these terms, a limited local war is not just local military action; it contains an element of “retaliation” on the Soviet homeland—not a small bit of retaliation, but a small probability of a massive war. 
54-   BRINKMANSHIP 
55-   The argument of this paper leads to a definition of brinkmanship and a concept of the “brink of war.” The brink is not, in this view, the sharp edge of a cliff where one can stand firmly, look down, and decide whether or not to plunge. The brink is a curved slope that one can stand on with some risk of slipping, the slope gets steeper and the risk of slipping greater as one moves toward the chasm. But the slope and the risk of slipping are rather irregular; neither the person standing there nor onlookers can be quite sure just how great the risk is, or how much it increases when one takes a few more steps downward. One does not, in brinkmanship, frighten the adversary who is roped to him by getting so close to the edge that if one decides to jump one can do so before anyone can stop him. Brinkmanship involves getting onto the slope where one may fall in spite of his own best efforts to save himself, dragging his adversary with him. [109] 
56-   Brinkmanship is thus the deliberate creation of a recognizable risk of war, a risk that one does not completely control. It is the tactic of deliberately letting the situation get somewhat out of hand, just because its being out of hand may be intolerable to the other party and force his accommodation. It means harassing and intimidating an adversary by exposing him to a shared risk, or deterring him by showing that if he makes a contrary move he may disturb us so that we slip over the brink whether we want to or not, carrying him with us. 
57-   The idea that we should “keep the enemy guessing” about our response, particularly about whether we shall respond, needs an interpretation along these lines. It is sometimes argued that we need not threaten the enemy with the certainty of retaliation or the certainty of resistance, but just scare him with the possibility that we may strike back. This idea may be misconceived if it means confronting the Russians with a possible response that remains for us to decide on, one way or the other. The Russians may guess that after the event we should prefer not to strike back, particularly if they perform their aggression in moderate bites; and if we are unwilling to arrange so that we have to strike back, and are even unwilling to say that we certainly shall, we may seem to confirm their understanding of what our preference would be if we left ourselves any escape. So, if we are afraid that an absolute commitment to the threat might fail in its purpose and commit us to an action we prefer not to be committed to, there may be little to salvage by trying to persuade the enemy that we just might decide to do it anyway. 
58-   But the situation is different if we get into a position where it is clear to the Russians that we are sufficiently involved that, while we probably have a way out, we may not. To say that we may or may not retaliate for an invasion of some neutral country, depending on how it suits as at the time, and that we shall not let the enemy make this decision for us, nor let him know just what to expect, may confront the enemy with what appears to be a bluff. But to get so involved in or near a neutral country with troops or other commitments that we are not altogether sure ourselves about whether we could evade a fight in case of invasion, may genuinely keep the enemy guessing. 
59-   In sum, it may make sense to try to keep the enemy guessing as long as we are not trying to keep him guessing about our own motivation. If the outcome is partly determined by events and processes that are manifestly somewhat beyond our comprehension and control, we create genuine risk for him. 
60-   THE IMPERFECT PROCESS OF DECISION 
61-   Underlying this threat that one “may” retaliate or precipitate war—the decision being somewhat beyond his control—is the notion that some of the most momentous decisions of government are taken by a process that is not entirely predictable, not fully “under control,” not altogether deliberate. It implies that a nation can get even into a major war somewhat inadvertently, by a decision process that might be called “imperfect” in the sense that the response to particular contingencies cannot exactly be foretold by any advance calculations, that the response to a particular contingency may depend on certain random or haphazard processes, or that there will be faulty information, faulty communication, misunderstanding, misuse of authority, panic, or human or mechanical failure. 
62-   This idea does not reflect an unusually cynical view of the decision process. In the first place, decisions do have to be taken on the basis of incomplete evidence and ambiguous warning; and it is unreasonable to deny in principle the possibility of an irrevocable action taken on a false alarm. (Furthermore, one need not be obsessed with the likelihood of false alarm to recognize that there may be levels below which this particular danger cannot be pushed without incurring other dangers that outweigh it!) 
63-   Second, war can occur because both sides become committed to irreconcilable positions from which neither is willing to back down, particularly if backing down requires assuming, even momentarily, a condition of military vulnerability. And it takes no cynic to recognize that two governments may misjudge each other’s commitments. 
64:   But in the third place, even an orderly government with responsible, comparatively cool-headed leaders is necessarily an imperfect decision system, especially in crises. This is so for a number of reasons, one of which is that in anything but a completely centralized dictatorship a number of persons participate in a decision, and they do not have identical value systems, judgments of enemy intentions, and estimates of military capabilities. A decision taken quickly in crisis may depend on who is present, on whether particular studies have been completed, on the initiative and forcefulness shown by particular leaders and counsellors who are reacting to a quite unprecedented stimulus. Some parts of the decision may be taken on delegated authority, and the person to whom the decision is delegated cannot necessarily reproduce the decision that would have been reached by a president or premier or cabinet in consultation with congressional or parliamentary leaders. There may even be some necessary contradictions in the decision process, such as constitutional issues that cannot be settled in advance but that make it difficult to prepare fully for certain contingencies because the necessity to break law or precedent can be accepted only implicitly, not explicitly prepared for. Finally, the need to keep secrets puts limits on the amount of advance preparation for contingencies that can be carried out. 
65-   For this reason there is no such thing as a “firm” plan, intention, or policy of a government to cover every contingency—even all important foreseeable contingencies. How the considerations add up, what interests are brought to bear, and how the collective decision procedure works in future crises is simply not fully determinable in advance. 
66-   If on top of this we recognize that there are ordinary human limitations on the intellectual and emotional ability of governmental decision makers during the conduct of dangerous maneuvers on the brink of war, it ought to be clear that there is such a thing as getting into a situation from which it looks as though the nation may successfully extricate itself but in which there is some appreciable risk that, try as it does within the limits it allows itself, it may not succeed. 
67-   One does not expect a government to call attention to its own failings in this regard and to communicate to an enemy that this incomplete mastery of its own actions is an integral part of its strategy. There are also powerful public-relations reasons for not pointing out to an enemy that one is even slightly susceptible to disastrous errors in judgment and false alarms, or that one is a little unsure how to escape from a risky situation. It is understandable, too, that a government engaged in limited war does not state that it has been attracted to this military action by the possible risk of all-out war that it entails. The point is that these things go without saying. 
68-   But the basic idea of a threat that leaves something to chance is important even if we do not consciously use it ourselves, even tacitly. In the first place it may be used against us. In the second place, we may misjudge some of the tactics we do use if we fail to recognize the presence of a risk-of-total-war ingredient that may be a significant part of our influence on the enemy even if we have never appreciated it. If—to take an example—this is an important part of the role of limited-war forces in Europe, our analysis of that role may be seriously mistaken if we do not recognize it. The usual idea that a trip wire either does work or does not work, that the Russians either expect it to work or expect it not to work, is mistaking two simple extremes for a more complicated range of probabilities. 
69-   
70- 
71-    
72-  