A Framework for the Private Governance of
Frontier Artificial Intelligence

Dean W. Ball1
Fellow, Fathom
Research Fellow, Mercatus Center
Nonresident Senior Fellow, Foundation for American Innovation

Abstract
This paper presents a proposal for the governance of frontier AI systems through a hybrid publicprivate system. Private bodies, authorized and overseen by government, provide certifications to
developers of frontier AI systems on an opt-in basis. In exchange for opting in, frontier AI firms
receive protections from tort liability for customer misuse of their models. Before detailing the
proposal, the paper explores more commonly discussed approaches to AI governance, analyzing
their strengths and flaws. It also examines the nature of frontier AI governance itself. The paper
includes consideration of the political economic, institutional, legal, safety, and other merits and
tradeoffs inherent in the governance system it proposes.

The views expressed in this paper are the author’s alone, and do not represent the views of any organization
with which he is a:iliated.
1

Acknowledgements
I am fortunate to have three institutional homes: the Mercatus Center, Fathom, and the
Foundation for American Innovation. Each have nourished my work in countless ways. I wish to
particularly thank Blake Pierson, Andrew Freedman, and Bri Treece from Fathom; Tyler Cowen,
Ben Klutsey, and Eileen Norcross from Mercatus; and Zach Graves, Max Bodach, and Samuel
Hammond from FAI.
I have also been lucky to have met a staggering number of brilliant and wise people during the
course of my research. Many of these people have also been kind enough to help me develop my
ideas, build my audience, and find new opportunities for policy entrepreneurship. I have been
profoundly enriched by them. Sometimes, even just a single conversation was enough to strike
fire.
I wish to thank: Michael Adamo, William Alexander, Mark Beall, Miles Brundage, Nathan
Calvin, Martin Casado, Paul Carrier, Brian Chau, Jack Clark, Declan Garvey, Aeden GasserBrennan, Brendan Gorrell, Tim Hwang (and all the Good People), Mike Knoop, Daniel
Kokotajlo, Seb Krier, Nathan Labenz, Nathan Lambert, Yuval Levin, Tim Lee, Keegan
McBride, Max Meyer, Perry Metzger, Matthew Mittelsteadt, Richard Ngo, Chris Painter,
Virginia Postrel, Nabeel Qureshi, Ketan Ramakrishnan, Santi Ruiz, Alan Rozenshtein, Cameron
Schiller, Jordan Schneider, Ari Schulman, Yo Shavit, Mike Solana, Adam Thierer, and Thomas
Woodside.
Thank you all, and many more.
Thank you, most of all, to my wife, Abigail, who never stopped believing in me.

Introduction
Frontier artificial intelligence systems will soon likely meet or exceed the performance of human
beings on a wide range of cognitive tasks. They may enable the substantial or complete
automation of many domains of knowledge work—everything from online marketing to
advanced mathematics to AI research and development itself. The capabilities and ambitions of
governments, firms, and individuals are likely to expand radically because of this new
technology. So, too, will the capacity of malicious actors to cause harm.
The range of conceivable governance challenges with a technology as general purpose as
intelligence itself is astonishingly broad. There are foreseeable risks which a wide variety of
actors—from industry to government to academia to civil society—have made progress in
addressing. But alongside those efforts, there is a meta-problem that needs to be solved: the
development a governance structure. Not a solution to any discrete problem, but an articulation
of the set of mechanisms, processes, and checks and balances used to solve problems themselves.
This is what the economist Friedrich Hayek would have called a nomocratic (process-oriented)
rather than a teleocratic (goal-oriented) structure.2
This dimension of frontier AI governance is somewhat more akin to the design of the
Constitution, a document that codifies processes for the solving of problems and resolution of
disputes without specifying any goal in particular. It is to this task that this paper is devoted.
This paper will present a framework for the private governance of frontier artificial intelligence
systems. That framework will be based upon a statutory mechanism whereby developers of AI
systems can opt in to oversight by private bodies whose function is to validate that the
developers have met a heightened standard of care. In exchange, the developers receive
protections from tort liability for user misuse of their systems.
The private bodies would be authorized and overseen by government. Government could
authorize as many private bodies as it deems fit, allowing different private governance
approaches to compete with one another on a variety of dimensions (cost, compliance
verification strategies, technical standards, and the like). The proposal includes safeguards
against a “race to the bottom” by regulators and industry. By operating as a voluntary regulatory
regime, this system of private governance would compete, in essence, with the status quo.
For the reader who is only interested in the specifics of the proposal, Section 4 will serve you
best. The remainder of the paper builds context and motivations for the proposal.
The paper will proceed as follows. The first section will begin by briefly outlining some of the
foreseeable governance challenges posed by frontier AI. Then, it will consider a use-based
governance system, where regulation focuses on policing illicit uses of AI rather than the
Hayek, Friedrich A. von. Law, Legislation, and Liberty, Volume 1: Rules and Order. The University of Chicago
Press. 1973.
2

development of AI systems themselves. While it will not argue against use-based regulation, it
will argue both that use-based regulation can easily become onerous, and that even a welldesigned use-based regulatory regime is insufficient to meet the challenges at hand. This section
will also argue that governance during the transition to advanced AI faces meaningfully distinct
constraints from governance after that transition has taken place.
The second section will articulate why traditional government regulation or standards-setting
mechanisms are unlikely to adapt well and with sufficient haste to these challenges. In doing so,
this section will argue that a centralized government regulator is suboptimal for reasons of both
practicality and political economy.
The third section will examine other proposed frontier AI governance frameworks: compute
governance, tort liability, and international governance. It will not dismiss any of these
frameworks out of hand, but instead outline their shortcomings as a governance framework
during the transition to frontier AI and the acute stresses this transition is likely to bring with it.
The fourth section will turn to private governance of frontier AI development as a solution. It
will explain the proposal sketched above in concrete detail, including mechanisms intended to
lessen the likelihood of one of the failure modes coming to fruition. It will explore parameters
that could be adjusted while maintaining the spirit of the proposal. And it will explain why
authorizing multiple private governance bodies is an essential part of the proposal, while taking
no position on which, if any, of these approaches to governance is best. Indeed, the objective of
this paper is to argue that different approaches should be put into trial and competition with one
another.
The private governance regime put forth here is intended to address a wide variety of
conceivable known and unknown challenges AI will pose. But its primary intent is to address the
gravest harms: loss of personal or digital property (whether by fraud, cyberattacks, etc.) and
physical harm. This is why the primary incentive for developers to participate in the system is
safe harbor from tort liability, not other forms of statutory liability such as civil rights and
consumer protection laws. However, other harms, such as algorithmic bias, could be
incorporated into this regime if policymakers and public believe it wise to do so. This would
need to be accompanied by a concomitant safe harbor against analogous forms of liability (i.e., a
private governance regime that includes algorithmic bias would need to also include protections
against liability under civil rights law).
Finally, this proposal is primarily intended to cover the development of software systems. It is not
a governance regime for other physical manifestations of AI, such as self-driving cars, consumer
or industrial robotics, autonomous drones, and the like. The author’s tentative conclusion is that
existing legal frameworks are reasonably suited to governing these technologies. It is the
development of infinitely scalable and replicable digital intelligences which this proposal intends
to address.

What is AI Governance?
1.1 The Challenges at the Frontier
For purposes of this paper, governing is the intellectual task of setting rules for how systems and
resources should be used. Governing also entails additional work, such as establishing
mechanisms for enforcing those rules, creating processes for resolving disputes about how the
rules should apply, and ensuring accountability if someone disobeys the rules.
Frontier AI governance specifically focuses on ensuring the safety, security, and reliability of
advanced AI systems. If these systems possess the profoundly novel capabilities that many
industry figures expect, they will require qualitatively different governance approaches than the
major technology waves of the past half-century. It is worth explicating why this is the case:
1. AI systems are intended by their developers to match or exceed human intellectual
capabilities. This includes the ability to perform any cognitive task that a computer can
perform using a computer—creating cyberattacks, conducting fraud, threatening or
intimidating others, and a vast range of other activities. The potential for misuse is
therefore high.
2. AI systems, being software, are infinitely scalable and replicable. This means that
harmful activity can be scaled rapidly and used to overwhelm societal defenses.
3. AI systems improve rapidly. Current rates of algorithmic efficiency improvements are
on the order of 400% per year, and this occurs as the cost of compute falls over time.
Thus, any capability available at a high cost now can be expected to be an order of
magnitude cheaper (and available to a wider range of actors) within approximately 12
months.
4. Researchers do not fully (or even, arguably mostly) understand how AI systems
work or how to control them. This includes a mechanistic understanding of how they
function, predicting their outputs, ensuring their objectives are aligned with actual human
user objectives, and maintaining model robustness and security against adversarial
attacks. Given that even current models are more like biological systems in their
complexity than they are like deterministic software systems, and that this complexity is
only likely to grow, it is likely that these problems will never be solved “perfectly.” They
are canonical examples of problems that will be solved piecemeal, through bricolage,3
because they are classic examples of “muddle through” or “wicked” problems.4
Those seeking a governance structure for frontier AI development should neither seek nor expect
that such a system will result in absolute control over all AI development. Given the sheer
3

Lévi-Strauss, Claude. The Savage Mind. The University of Chicago Press. 1962.

For application of this concept to AI, see also Stahl et al., “Challenges of AI Alignment—Negotiating the
Plurality of Values in AI Ecosystems through Bricolage,” Scientiﬁc Reports, 2025.
4
Madhavan, Guru. Wicked Problems: How to Engineer a Better World. 2024.

weight and momentum of the observations laid out above, no such outcome is likely to be
achievable.
One can also argue that it is not desirable for any set of actors to maintain absolute control over
the development of something as powerful as AI.5 But this is almost beside the point: the current
trajectory in the United States and much of the world is for this technology to develop and
diffuse with very few tailored governance mechanisms. One can question whether totalitarian
control of AI is wise, but that is not an option on the table. Governance, in this case, should not
aim for such a level of control, but instead aim for something more modest: a modicum of order.6
To say that something is governed is to make a specific set of claims. It is not to say, in general,
that it is controlled absolutely by the entities that govern it. Instead, governing is a specific kind
of relationship between the thing that is governed and those entities that do the governing. While
governance sometimes “bans” conduct, practices, or products, very often it does not. Instead, it
frequently operates by creating incentives for compliance through both the assignment of
accountability (fines, liability damages, etc.) and of benefits (legal protections, easier market
access, and the like).
Given the speed with which AI development capabilities diffuse to smaller actors whose
practices will be difficult for the state to make legible, and the vast range of uses to which “AI”
can be applied, it is unlikely that a general-purpose governance regime is currently possible. Our
hope and expectation for the near-term should be something more achievable—namely, the
governance of frontier AI.
1.2 The Objectives and Character of Frontier AI Governance
Frontier AI governance has several characteristics to recommend it as the primary focus of shortterm AI policy.7 First, it concentrates policymakers on the most acute emerging risks and
opportunities, allowing the state to develop a “preview” of what capabilities will be in the hands
of a much wider range of actors (including nefarious actors) soon. Second, because frontier AI
systems are built by a small number of firms, frontier AI development is relatively legible to the
law without a massive near-term boost in state capacity. Third, given that frontier AI firms tend
to lead their industry in capabilities, market share, and resources, their adoption of best practices,
As actors with a diverse range of perspectives have, e.g.:
Senator Ted Cruz, remarks to the Special Competitive Studies Project, March 2025
Verdegem, Pieter. “Dismantling AI Capitalism: The Commons as an Alternative to the Power Concentration of
Big Tech.” AI & Society, April 2022.
Andreesen, Marc. “The Techno-Optimist Manifesto.” October 2023.
Ball, Dean W. “Decentralized Training and the Fall of Compute Thresholds.” Hyperdimensional. October 2024.
5

A list of questions that might be considered relevant for maintaining the “modicum of order” can be found in
Reuel et al. “Open Problems in Technical AI Governance,” July 2024
7
Other reasoning for a focus on the frontier is available in e.g. Anderljung et al., “Frontier AI Regulation:
Managing Emerging Risks to Public Safety.” November 2023.
6

technical standards, and other governance mechanisms is likely to create an industry benchmark
for others to follow.
Perhaps most importantly, though, it is at the frontier that novel and world-changing capabilities
are likeliest to emerge first. Societies, including free societies based on the principles of classical
liberalism, have a legitimate interest in constraining the possibilities for catastrophic misuse of
technologies whose capabilities have only just reached the world.8 It is at the frontier that society
is likely to be shocked at what it finds (for the good and for the bad). It is at the frontier that
society is likely to be least prepared. So it is at the frontier that society is wisest to construct its
safeguards.
What might those safeguards include? A non-exhaustive list might include:
Verification of model training data for security vulnerabilities9
Research and implementation of model alignment and control methods
Adversarial robustness against prompt injections and model jailbreaks10
Usage monitoring for detection of illicit requests11
Providing information to the public about model characteristics, evaluations, risks, and
developer risk management practices
6. Providing models to government for pre-deployment testing for national security-related
risks
7. Providing information to government and the public on model usage for economic and
labor market analysis
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Mill, John Stuart. On Liberty. 1859.
Hayek, Friedrich A. von. The Constitution of Liberty, Chapter 4 (“Freedom, Reason, and Tradition”). 1960.
Buchanan, James. The Limits of Liberty: Between Anarchy and Leviathan. 1975.
Nozick, Robert. Anarchy, State, and Utopia. 1974.
9
See both Hubinger et al. “Sleeper Agents: Training Deceptive LLMs that Persist Through Safety Training.”
(January 2024) and Anthropic, “Simple Probes Can Catch Sleeper Agents” (April 2024) for examples of both
proactive risk identiﬁcation and mitigation.
10
See Lapid, Raz et al. “Open Sesame! Universal Black Box Jailbreaking of Large Language Models”
(September 2023) for research on the problem, and for proposed mitigations:
Sharma, Mrinank et al. “Constitutional Classiﬁers: Defending Against Universal Jailbreaks across Thousands
of Hours of Red Teaming” (February 2025) and Zaremba, Wojciech et al. “Trading Inference-Time Compute for
Adversarial Robustness.” (January 2025)
11
Usage monitoring is often, though not always, infeasible for developers of open-source and open-weight AI
systems. Other items on this list are impossible for developers of such systems to guarantee, because having
access to model weights allows malicious actors to remove model safeguards, frequently with minimal
compute. The resolution to this problem is unclear. Open-source and open-weight models provide unique
beneﬁts in terms of competitiveness, facilitation of open science, and technology di:usion. Currently, the
beneﬁts of these systems at the frontier likely outweigh their marginal risks (see, for example, Kapoor et al.,
“On the Societal Impact of Open Foundation Models”). This could change for tomorrow’s frontier. Making this
decision is a di:icult matter of both technocracy and politics is one of the many functions a frontier AI
governance regime would serve, though it is worth stressing that the question of whether open models are
desirable at the frontier is entirely separate from whether they are desirable in general.
8

Each of these tasks is one for which only a frontier model developer could take primary
responsibility. These are the kinds of tasks a frontier AI governance system should aim to
incentivize and accelerate. Most also require technical research and allocation of limited
compute budgets, meaning that information sharing in these domains among frontier AI
developers could conceivably create efficiencies. Information sharing of this kind by companies
themselves risks running afoul of antitrust law, meaning that a third party intermediary (either
government or a private governance body of some kind) is required to facilitate it; this is another
ancillary benefit of a governance regime.
After the transition to advanced AI has gained hold, and some measure of stability has been
found, an altogether different governance regime may be called for than the one designed to
govern the frontier. This new regime may be more expansive or considerably lighter touch.
Unfortunately, it is impossible to predict what our needs will be not only because of the
uncertainty associated with how advanced AI will transform the world, but also because of
uncertainty associated with how it will transform government, and thus the kinds of governance
that are possible in the first place.
Many frontier AI policy proposals have focused on regulating frontier models. This approach
typically involves creating a threshold based on characteristics of the model above which
regulation of some kind is triggered.12 The challenge with this approach is that the frontier is in
constant and rapid motion; today’s frontier is tomorrow’s old news. Thus, a frontier threshold
today will cover a far broader range of models in the not-too-distant future, eventually coming to
encompass smaller firms that might lack the ability to comply with the regulations.
Even with dynamic thresholds designed to adjust over time, there are challenges to using “the AI
model” as the basic conceptual unit of frontier AI governance (or indeed, any AI governance).
Even today, models change rapidly, with incremental updates to their weights delivered on a
near-weekly basis. Some of these are publicly announced “feature” updates, and some are more
akin to “bug fixes,” to use traditional software analogies.
In the recent past, we have seen the birth of the “reasoning” paradigm, which employs largescale, reinforcement-learning-based posttraining on a pretrained language model.13 Many
See e.g.
Executive O:ice of the President, Executive Order 14110. “Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and
Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence.” 88 FR 75191, 2023-24283. (rescinded)
12

European Union Artiﬁcial Intelligence Act, Chapter V, Article 51. “Classiﬁcation of General-Purpose AI Models
as General-Purpose AI Models with Systemic Risk.”
Safe and Secure Innovation for Frontier Artiﬁcial Intelligence Models Act (SB 1047). California Senate, 20232024 legislative session.
13
The most detailed technical explanation of this approach is available in DeepSeek-AI, “DeepSeek-R1:
Incentivizing Reasoning Capability in LLMs via Reinforcement Learning.”
See also OpenAI, “OpenAI o1 System Card.”

model-based thresholds, designed before the reasoning paradigm had entered the picture, were
caught flat-footed and would not have captured these reasoning models despite the models being
plainly at the frontier.14 What’s more, looking ahead, the idea of “the model” as a singular artifact
could become even more outdated, with various methods of continual learning (and thus constant
adjustment of weights) under investigation by researchers.15
All these trends push against using the model as the basis for frontier AI regulation.16 A better
approach would be to rely upon a concept that is unlikely to go out of fashion so rapidly: the
corporate entity.17 Regulating frontier AI firms could include not just their largest and most
expensive models, but all models developed by the firm, whether for internal or public
deployment, as well as the firm’s business and research practices, internal processes, and holistic
approach to safety and security.
Regulating frontier AI firms would not just be a recognition that the practices of these firms pose
unique risks to society (a contestable observation, but an argument this paper supports). It would
also recognize that the AI services they provide form a kind of domestic (and likely global)
digital infrastructure, requiring continual and dynamic safety and security procedures. These
entities are likely to be the primary stewards of digital intelligences which in turn undergird a
nontrivial fraction of cognitive activity in the world. Their effects on culture, the economy,
government, and much else will be profound, and entity-based regulation merely recognizes the
unique character of these firms in particular. The governance of these firms is likely to require a
macroprudential posture.
How to recognize entities as the subjects of regulation while mitigating against the possibility of
regulatory capture is a crucial topic to which we will return in section four.
1.3 The Limitations of Use-Based AI Regulation
Before proceeding to a discussion of various approaches to frontier AI governance, it is
necessary to address two questions that are often raised in AI policy discussions: should we not
simply regulate malicious AI uses? And are not most malicious uses of AI already illegal?
The answer depends largely upon what is meant by “regulating AI uses.” Certainly, post hoc
enforcement of existing statutes against plainly malicious and currently illegal uses of AI (e.g.

Anthropic, “Claude 3.7 Sonnet System Card.”
14
Ball, Dean W. “An Extraordinary Alien: OpenAI’s o1 Challenges AI Policy.” Hyperdimensional. September
2024.
15
Wu, Tongwong et al. “Continual Learning for Large Language Models: A Survey.” February 2024.
Dean, Je: (Google Research). “Introducing Pathways: A Next-Generation AI Architecture.” October 2021.
16
For more on the limitations of so-called compute thresholds, see:
Hooker, Sara. “On the Limitations of Compute Thresholds as a Governance Strategy.” July 2024.
17
For more on designing entity-based regulatory thresholds, see Ball, Dean. W and Ketan Ramakrishnan, “On
Entity-Based Regulation in Frontier AI Governance” (working title), Mercatus Center, April 2025 and Williams,
Sophie et al., “On Regulating Downstream AI Developers” (March 2025)

fraud) are desirable. Few would dispute that this is the basis of a sound governance regime for
any technology.
The trouble, however, is twofold. First, many use-based governance regimes are, in practice,
preemptive rather than post hoc use-based regulations. Instead of enforcing the law after a harm
has occurred, these regimes focus on avoiding the possibility of harm by adding on procedural
compliance burdens to the (often) already extensive set of legal obligations companies face
under existing statutory and common law.18
While there are undoubtedly some areas where the use of AI does merit additional, preemptive
risk assessment by deployers, overreliance on such an approach risks spreading an undue
compliance burden to firms throughout the economy. In general, preexisting tort and statutory
liability provides an incentive for firms (particularly in heavily regulated domains of commercial
activity) to exercise care prior to deployment. Regulators would be better served by developing
quantitative, objective standards to which the industries they oversee should comply. Simply
adding more paperwork to the equation increases an already-large compliance burden while
fundamentally punting on the question of “what does a responsible deployment of AI in a given
context look like?”19
Second, many cases of malfeasance will be more effectively and efficiently addressed by action
on the developer, rather than the deployer, side of the value chain. For example, if agentic AI
systems of the near future can be used commit fraud at scale (say, 10,000 successful cases of
fraud in a day), the use-based regime would have law enforcement respond to each of those cases
without, necessarily, any ramifications for the developer of the model that enabled the harm.
Developers, in this world, would be under no or very little obligation to preemptively mitigate
such harms, and law enforcement would be left scrambling amid a potential tsunami of novel
misconduct.20
Without a doubt, law enforcement will have to learn to scale its own responses in a world replete
with advanced AI. But placing this burden entire on the post hoc actions of government, and
hence on the wallet of the taxpayer, is fundamentally unjust. While this paper will later argue
against the use of tort liability in particular as a means of compelling frontier AI developers to
internalize negative externalities of their services, there is no doubt that any sound frontier AI
governance regime must compel such internalization to at least some meaningful extent.

See, e.g.
“Concerning Consumer Protections in Interactions with Artiﬁcial Intelligence Systems,” Colorado SB 205
(signed May 17, 2024)
European Union Artiﬁcial Intelligence Act, Chapter III, Article 27, “Fundamental Rights Impact Assessment for
High-Risk AI Systems.”
19
For more discussion, see the “A Longer-Term Vision for AISI” section in Ball, Dean W. “On the US AI Safety
Institute.” Hyperdimensional. March 2025.
20
Brundage et al. “The Malicious Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence.” February 2018.
18

Use-based regulation, including preemptive regulation, is not without its place in the overall
landscape of AI governance. And post hoc enforcement of the law should and likely will remain
the primary means of policing illicit conduct enabled by AI. But frontier developers have an
important and enduring role to play in ensuring that major harms from their systems, including to
uninvolved third parties (that is, neither the user nor the developer), are mitigated.
Why Centralized Government AI Regulation is Undesirable
2.1 The Political Economy of Centralized AI Regulation
Existing AI systems have already shaken the status quo in numerous ways both subtle and
obvious.21 If advanced AI systems are capable of automating significant fractions of human
knowledge labor, it seems reasonable to suppose that they will challenge the status quo far more
directly and viscerally.22 In addition to this, frontier AI firms themselves could wield large
amounts of power and influence over the political and regulatory system. It is therefore worth
thinking carefully about the incentives of a centralized government AI regulator.
A useful lens here is that of public choice economics, which studies regulatory bodies not as
abstract entities, but instead as organizations composed of individuals—bureaucrats writing and
enforcing rules, lobbyists striving to influence that process, and politicians overseeing the
apparatus.23 Public choice examines the incentives of those individuals, aiming to create a sketch
of what regulation is likely to achieve rather than what it is intended or desired to achieve.24
The most obvious takeaway from public choice economics is that regulated firms often shape
rules in subtle ways that reflect their business interests. This is known as “rent-seeking” or
“regulatory capture.”25 This process need not be a corrupt one. Often, it arises almost
sociologically, through simple patterns of interaction with regulated entities and their
regulators.26 It is especially likely to arise in complex technical fields where both the
measurement and mitigation of risks are high-dimensional tasks. Very often in these situations,

Brynjolfson, Erik and Tom Mitchell. “What Can Machine Learning Do? Workforce Implications.” Science vol.
358, issue 6370. December 2017.
22
Eloundou, Tyna et al. “GPTs are GPTs: An Early Look at the Labor Market Impact Potential of Large Language
Models.” August 2023.
23
Buchanan, James M. and Gordon Tullock. The Calculus of Consent: Logical Foundations of Constitutional
Democracy. 1962.
24
Stigler, George J. “The Theory of Economic Regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics and Management
Science, Vol. 2 No. 1, Spring 1971. RAND Corporation.
25
Krueger, Anne. O. “The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society.” American Economic Review, June
1974.
26
Carpenter, Daniel and David Moss. Preventing Regulatory Capture: Special Interest Inﬂuence and How to
Limit It. Cambridge University Press. 2013.
21

there is a substantial information asymmetry between the regulator and the regulated firms, and it
is hard for regulators not to defer to the expertise of the firms they regulate.27
But regulatory capture by regulated industry is far from the only challenge with a centralized AI
regulator. For one thing, the technology industry has been remarkably unlikely to lobby for
regulatory moats against competition in recent decades.28 But for another, there are a far greater
number of special interests that could attempt to sway a centralized regulator.29
AI seems poised to challenge the economic interests of a wide variety of entrenched groups,
including, but far from limited to: primary and higher education, the healthcare industry,
financial services, lawyers, media companies, and a vast range of other white collar professional
services. Together, these groups compose some of the most powerful interest groups in American
politics, as well as a significant fraction of US Gross Domestic Product.30
These groups have a legitimate right to advocate for their interests. But empowering a
centralized, general-purpose regulator of frontier AI systems risks creating a legal chokepoint,
allowing any and all of these groups to lobby for regulations that hinder the velocity of AI
development, the utility of AI products (for example, by requiring AI outputs that compete with
the work of licensed professionals to be reviewed by a licensed human in that field31), and the
overall diffusion of AI technology in society.32
The interests of any particular set of economic actors may run counter to the overall interests of
society. Weighing these tradeoffs is a fundamentally political, rather than technocratic or even
particularly legal, process. These disputes, therefore, are the primary function of legislatures
rather than bureaucracies. A centralized government regulator, in addition to being ill-suited to
the task, short circuits this fundamentally political process—a process which is undoubtedly to
consume much of the attention of policymakers over the coming decades. America’s politicians

La:ont, Jean-Jacques and Jean Tirole. “The Politics of Government Decision-Making: A Theory of Regulatory
Capture.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 106, No. 4. Oxford University Press, November 1991.
28
Indeed, large technology ﬁrms have often used existing regulatory structures to their distinct advantage
rather than seeking to erect new regulatory moats. See, for example, Khan, Lina M. “Amazon’s Antitrust
Paradox.” The Yale Law Journal, Volume 126, No. 3. January 2017.
27

“It is as if Bezos charted the company’s growth by ﬁrst drawing a map of antitrust laws, and then devising
routes to smoothly bypass them. With its missionary zeal for consumers, Amazon has marched toward
monopoly by singing the tune of contemporary antitrust.” (Page 716)
29
Wilson, James Q. (Ed). The Politics of Regulation. 1980.
30
Bureau of Economic Analysis. Gross Output by Industry. Accessed March 30, 2025.
31
Section 13, “An Act Relating to Artiﬁcial Intelligence Systems,” SB 199, Nevada Senate.
32
There is ample evidence that special interest groups have lobbied to reduce the utility and development of
existing, potentially competitive technologies, e.g.:
Barton, Benjamin H. and Deborah L. Rhode. “Access to Justice and Routine Legal Services: New Technologies
Meet Bar Regulators.” Hastings Law Journal, Volume 70, Issue 4.
Rauch, Daniel E. and David Schleicher. “Like Uber, but for Local Government Regulation: The Future of Local
Regulation of the ‘Sharing Economy.’” The Ohio State Law Journal, Volume 76, Issue 4. 2015.

can and should look at these conflicts between consumer surplus and special interests directly in
the face, rather than punting them to the domain of an ostensibly technical regulatory body. But a
centralized government regulator makes this punting all too likely.
To be clear, these political economy challenges are likely risks to any regulation of almost any
technology. And they are likely to present themselves with AI no matter what regulatory
approach we pursue. But they are especially acute in the centralized regulation of a generalpurpose technology. Thus, additional care must be taken to mitigate against adverse political
economy outcomes.
In the discussion to follow on the private governance strategy proposed by this paper, we will
explore how competitive private regulatory bodies (imperfectly) mitigate against many of these
challenges. But it is worth briefly observing that many of these political economy problems stem
from, or are at least worsened by, the fact that traditional regulation envisions government as
possessing a monopoly on the task of regulation itself. If one accepts the premise that regulation
in the abstract, and frontier AI governance in particular, are pro-social goods, then it should also
follow that the production function—the structure—which produces those goods deserves
scrutiny. The central question is this: how many goods of similar societal value do we entrust to a
monopoly? The virtue of competition is thoroughly rooted in the American psyche and in
bipartisan political rhetoric. But in the case of regulation and technocratic governance, that virtue
is thrown by virtually all scholars, politicians, and other observers out of the window. It is
assumed that regulation must be the domain of a monopoly provider—the government. This
paper, and the proposal it offers, seeks to challenge that basic assumption.33
These theoretical and structural concerns are cause enough to question the efficacy of a
centralized AI regulator. Unfortunately, there are numerous practical challenges as well.
2.2 The Practical Barriers to Government AI Regulation
As a general matter, any regulation (public or private) of AI—even just of frontier AI—presents
numerous practical challenges. The technology evolves rapidly. It can be difficult to define
precisely what it is.34 Frontier AI regulation is technically daunting and requires answering
questions that currently have no good answers (and in some cases, may never; see the prior
discussion on the wicked problems of frontier AI governance). It is difficult to hire the human
experts necessary to execute on frontier AI governance.35

I am here indebted ﬁrst and foremost to the work of Gillian Hadﬁeld and Jack Clark in their paper
“Regulatory Markets: The Future of AI Governance.” (April 2023)
34
Even at the frontier, deﬁnitions are di:icult. See the preceding discussion in Section 1.2
35
Note that this challenge may be worse in the public sector than in the private sector. We have good reason,
for example, to believe that ﬁxed government pay scales and lengthy hiring timelines can be an impediment
to hiring relevant expertise within bureaucracies. Yet it is also the case that, for example, the United Kingdom
and United States AI Safety Institutes have, by most accounts, sta:ed themselves ably with experts willing to
33

All of these are challenges that any AI governance body will face. There are reasons to believe
that competing private governance bodies will face them more ably than a monopoly government
regulator will. These reasons will be discussed in depth in a later section of this paper. For the
time being, though, we should consider these challenges to be the table stakes in this particular
game of poker. The task of this section is to consider what additional drawbacks government
regulators bring to the table. resources, trust)
First is the fact that AI governance is likely to require the aggressive and creative adoption of
emerging technologies, not the least of which is frontier AI systems themselves. It is hard to
imagine how one could meaningfully govern a new information and cognitive technology
without the use of that same technology. How could one effectively govern, for example, the
internet, without also using the internet themselves?
Yet government agencies tend to lag in technology adoption for a complex myriad of cultural,
bureaucratic, and legal reasons.36 This is a widely recognized problem in American public
administration, and progress is conceivable. Progress might even lead to governments
modernizing data infrastructure, fully adopting cloud computing, and successfully diffusing other
technologies of the last decade. But even if that progress comes to fruition, it is unlikely that
government will become a leading-edge adopter of emerging technologies, or an innovator in
their use. At the very least, it is a risky bet to take with something as crucial as frontier AI
governance. On the other hand, it is generally accepted that private firms tend to outpace
governing in the adoption of emerging technologies.37
Second, there is the fact that the political process often fails to allocate capital in ways suited to
meet the needs of administrative agencies. The United States federal government,38 as well as
many state and local governments,39 face significant debt burdens that make funding ambitious
new government initiatives difficult.
The most relevant government effort proximate to frontier AI governance is the export controls
placed on AI computing hardware and semiconductor manufacturing equipment by the Biden
Administration beginning in October 2022.40 Despite frequently winning bipartisan support in
Congress, the enforcing agency—the Bureau of Industry and Security within the United States
Department of Commerce—has not received the funding it needs to conduct this function
face those obstacles in the interest of public service. Thus I do not include human capital acquisition in the
list of challenges uniquely facing government.
36
Pahlka, Jennifer. Recoding America: Why Government is Failing in the Digital Age and How We Can Do
Better. 2023.
37
Hinkley, Sara. “Technology in the Public Sector and the Future of Government Work.” University of
California-Berkeley Labor Center. January 2023.
38
United States Senate Joint Economic Committee. “National Debt Growth.” March 2025.
39
United States Census Bureau. “Annual Survey of State Government Finances.” October 2024.
40
Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of Commerce. “Commerce Implements New Export Controls
on Advanced Computing and Semiconductor Manufacturing Items to the People’s Republic of China (PRC).”
October 7, 2022.

properly.41 It uses legacy information technology systems that render it far less capable of
performing its job even with limited operational support42—itself an indicator of underfunding.
Not only is the additional funding to fulfill this bipartisan national security function not appear to
be forthcoming—there is a chance that BIS’ funding could be reduced in the coming fiscal
year.43
We therefore have good reason to believe that even if government sets up a well-structured and
properly scoped frontier AI governance function, and even if that body is given the authority it
needs to acquire technology and human talent as quickly and flexibly as necessary, and even if
support for this function is bipartisan, that Congress still might systematically under-fund the
entity in question. Meanwhile, we know that the philanthropic sector alone has ample interest in
supporting AI governance initiatives, and have strong reason to believe that a private frontier AI
governance body (or several) could be amply funded with private dollars.
Finally, there is the issue of trust. As discussed above, frontier AI governance is likely to require
the sharing of data, best practices, and other information between frontier AI firms. These firms
are unlikely to engage in such information sharing purely among one another due to potential
risk of antitrust investigations. Thus, some sort of intermediary is required to facilitate this
exchange. Given that the information in question is very likely to be commercially sensitive, this
intermediary will need to be well-trusted by all parties. Firms would need to trust that the
information would not be used against them by an aggressive regulator (either the AI regulator
themselves or an adjacent government regulator that could obtain access). A demonstrably
neutral private governance body is, at the margin, better positioned to serve this role—and
indeed, a nascent frontier AI governance body called the Frontier Model Forum is already doing
this.44
Frontier AI governance is challenging enough on its own. Centralized government regulation
faces a wide range of both political economy and practicality drawbacks that make it less likely
to succeed in the near term when compared to alternative governance arrangements. But private
governance is only one of those alternatives. Let us now examine alternative public AI
governance structures.

Hammond, Samuel. “Supporting the Bureau of Industry and Security.” Testimony delivered to U.S. House
Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies. May
2024.
42
O:ice of Congressman Jason Crow. “Reps. Crow and Kean Introduce Bill to Modernize the Bureau of
Industry and Security’s IT Systems.” August 2024.
43
Selinger, Marc. “BIS Could See 10.5% Funding Cut in 2025, Senator Says.” Export Compliance Daily. March
2025.
44
Frontier Model Forum (FMF). “FMF Announces First-of-its-Kind Information-Sharing Agreement.” March
2025.
41

Exploring Alternatives to Centralized Frontier AI Governance
3.1 Compute Governance
Compute governance seeks to manage frontier AI through the hardware on which frontier AI
systems are trained and deployed—most commonly graphics processing units (GPUs), tensor
processing units (TPUs), or, for model inference, application-specific integrated circuits
(ASICs). The export controls on advanced AI hardware, referenced above, are an example of
compute governance in practice. Compute governance can also include measures to ensure
visibility and trackability, such as “on-chip governance”—dedicated coprocessors embedded into
larger chips that track the device’s location, security status, and other characteristics.45 It could
even involve more ambitious steps, such as the creation of a unilateral or multi-lateral,
government-backed “Compute Reserve” that would operate akin to a central bank, adjusting
levels of compute available to the global marketplace based on the desirability of doing so to
policymakers. In short, compute governance spans a wide range of potential policies, with the
only commonality being their focus on hardware rather than software.46
There is no frontier AI without frontier compute. And compute is a physical good, making it
much more legible to the policymaking apparatus than AI models, which are infinitely replicable
software. Indeed, the highest-end AI computing hardware, often made on leading-edge
semiconductor nodes, is among the most difficult-to-produce goods mankind has ever devised.
All these factors lend themselves positively to using compute as the primary means of governing
frontier AI.
Compute-based governance has been used thus far as a means of keeping AI capabilities out of
the hands of America’s adversaries, most notably China. Despite noteworthy flaws, the Biden
Administration’s export controls have worked reasonably well, seeming to have blunted China’s
ability to maintain a frontier AI ecosystem. In the long run, the controls could backfire
significantly. The imposition of the controls appears to have caused China to redouble its
commitment to aggressively invest in catching up to the United States on semiconductor design
and manufacturing.47 If China eventually does develop its own leading-edge semiconductor
ecosystem, US export controls on American products will no longer function as intended.
The decision to implement the export controls, however wise it might have been, also created
path dependency in American policymaking. The inevitable result of government controls on the
movement of desirable physical goods is that those goods will be transported illicitly or quasiAarne, Onni et al. “Secure, Governable Chips: Using On-Chip Mechanisms to Manage National Security
Risks from AI & Advanced Computing.” Center for a New American Security. January 2024.
46
A broader survey of the range of options in compute governance—and a well-articulated argument in favor
of pursuing compute governance—is available in Sastry et al. “Computing Power and the Governance of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence.” Centre for the Governance of AI. February 2024.
47
Triolo, Paul. “A New Era for the Chinese Semiconductor Industry: Beijing Responds to Export Controls.”
American AWairs. Spring 2024.
45

illicitly. There is substantial evidence for both illicit48 and quasi-illicit49 movement of high-end
computing hardware after the export controls took effect. The result of this is that, within
approximately two years, the Biden Administration’s export controls ratcheted up from a “small
yard, high fence” approach of restricting Chinese access to a narrow range of products to, as the
Biden Diffusion Framework put it, “regulat[ing] the global diffusion of the most advanced
artificial intelligence models and large clusters of advanced computing integrated circuits.”50
Implementing the “small yard, high fence” strategy, it turned out, required regulating the
construction of large data centers, export of advanced compute, and use of frontier models in
every country on Earth.
And despite these downsides, even some of the leading proponents of export controls tend to
agree that the controls will not deny China (and with enough time, any adversary) the ability to
develop frontier models, as DeepSeek’s v3 and r1 models partially demonstrated. Instead, the
proponents argue, export controls are intended to deny our adversaries AI ecosystems—the
economy-wide benefits of AI that can only come from widespread use of compute.51 This logic is
sensible, but it does not change the fact that, if frontier AI is indeed a kind of weapon that our
adversaries wish to use against America or the West, export controls are unlikely to stop them.
Thus, even under the best of circumstances, compute export controls have significant tradeoffs.
The tradeoffs may have been worth it, and the policy as a whole may have been wise. But any
additional compute governance mechanisms—such as the on-chip governance discussed briefly
above—are likely to only add to the incentive for adversary countries to develop an alternative
computing ecosystem. Once that ecosystem is in place—and this is an inevitable outcome—
compute governance as a foreign policy tool is no longer viable.
The limitations of compute governance are even more apparent in the creation of a domestic
governance regime—the objective of this paper. Compute governance so far has been used to
limit or to deny outright advanced AI capabilities to American adversaries. Even on-chip
governance ideas have been put forth primary to advance these broader objectives of limitation

Grunewald, Erich. “AI Chip Smuggling into China: Potential Paths, Quantities, and Countermeasures.”
Institute for AI Policy and Strategy. October 2023.
49
From the Bureau of Industry and Security: “BIS is also concerned regarding the potential for China to use
IaaS solutions to undermine the e:ectiveness of the October 7 IFR controls and continues to evaluate how it
may approach this through a regulatory response.”
“Implementation of Additional Export Controls: Certain Advanced Computing Items; Supercomputer and
Semiconductor End Use; Updates and Corrections,” 88 FR 73458, 2023-23055, pgs. 73458-73517. October
2023.
48

Bureau of Industry and Security. “Framework for Artiﬁcial Intelligence Di:usion.” 90 FR 4544, 2025-00636,
pgs. 4554-4584. January 2025.
51
Lee, Timothy B., Dean W. Ball, and Lennart Heim. “Lennart Heim on the AI Di:usion Rule.” AI Summer.
January 2025.
50

or denial. But it would be senseless, of course, to try to limit or deny compute to the domestic
economy.
In principle, compute governance could be used as a domestic tool to ensure that malicious uses
of models are curtailed at the lowest possible level of the AI supply chain—the physical
hardware itself. On-chip governance, for example, could be used to examine the computations
running on the primary part of the AI chip to ensure that it is not a malicious usage of an AI
model. This would take pressure off model providers to do such usage monitoring themselves. In
particular, developers of open-source and open-weight frontier models would be freed from any
obligation to monitor their models’ usage, which is otherwise impossible with such models.
The significant and unshakeable tradeoff is that this on-chip governance mechanism would
amount to, at the very least, a government-mandated security vulnerability in all frontier AI
computing hardware,52 and at worst, a backdoor giving government the option to surveil all AI
computing performed using those chips.
In addition to being a violation of privacy and creating a potentially enormous security
vulnerability in American computing infrastructure, such a mechanism could very well
incentivize AI deployment into a kind of underground market. It is already possible to run
sophisticated models locally on consumer and prosumer hardware. Increasingly, it is even
possible to train modestly sophisticated models on decentralized networks of geographically
distributed computing hardware.53
There are some domestic policy objectives that compute governance and similar approaches
(such as data center-level regulations) can achieve. For example, some scholars have recently
suggested trading relaxed federal permitting for large scale computing clusters in exchange for
the resultant data center adhering to stringent cybersecurity requirements.54 This is a pro-social
and eminently achievable goal.
But for any broader domestic frontier AI governance system, with the goals described above in
Section 1.2, compute governance simply is not suitable.
3.2 Tort Liability and Insurance
A “tort,” coming originally from the Latin tortum (“injustice,” “twisted”) is a wrongful act
committed by one person that results in injury—physical harm, loss of property, or both—to
another. In the United States, it is primarily a creature of state, rather than federal, law (the vast
The recent, and quite possibly ongoing, Chinese inﬁltration of American telecommunications systems was
enabled at least in part by a government-mandated backdoor (in the Communications Assistance for Law
Enforcement Act) to permit law enforcement wiretaps.
Krouse, Sarah et al. “US Wiretap Systems Targeted in China-Linked Hack.” The Wall Street Journal. October 5,
2024.
53
Jaghouar, Sami et al. “INTELLECT-1 Technical Report.” December 2024.
54
Datta, Arnab and Tim Fist. “Compute in America: A Policy Playbook.” Institute for Progress, February 2025.
52

majority of tort cases are filed in state courts55). This also means that tort law varies considerably
from state to state, though private governance bodies such as the American Law Institute exist to
harmonize the standards for tort litigation to some extent.56
Tort liability of various forms has been proposed by many as a tool to incentivize frontier AI
developers to take heightened care with regard to the safety and security of their AI systems.57 It
is almost certainly the case that tort liability of some form or another already applies to frontier
AI developers for at least some harms; the specifics will be determined either piecemeal by
courts as cases present themselves, or top-down by legislatures.58 The most prominent proposed
AI laws in the United States have relied upon tort liability (negligence in particular) as a means
of enforcement.59 In other words, tort liability, broadly conceived, is America’s current default
governance mechanism for frontier AI development. It is worthwhile, therefore, to take a step
back and examine the system as a whole.
The tort system as it exists today in the United States originates in, but is distinct from, English
common law—law made by judges in the resolution of individual cases rather than by legislators
in the passage of statutes. Most importantly, US tort law underwent a transformation in the mid20th century from a purely legal mechanism to a tool of economic policymaking. This was an era
when society was still contending with the rise of the managerial corporation, mass-produced
goods, and (relatively) new inventions like the automobile, modern pharmaceuticals, and an
immense diversity of other goods that posed novel dangers to individuals. At the time, liability
for the corporations that made these goods was primarily determined through contract warranty
claims (which often contained broad disclaimers of liability) or negligence liability, which at the
time was exceedingly difficult for plaintiffs (victims) to establish.
Legal scholars, armed with concepts from economics, sought to cause corporations to internalize
their negative externalities, and they sought to use the tort system to accomplish this fundamental
public policy objective. The scholars and jurists who led this movement began to apply strict
liability (liability regardless of how much care was exercised by the manufacturer) to products,
and at the same time to soften the standard for proving negligence on the part of the seller of a
service or good.

Bureau of Justice Statistics, “Tort Cases in Large Counties.” United States Department of Justice, 1992.
See e.g. A Concise Restatement of Torts, Third Edition. 2013.
57
See e.g.:
Weil, Gabriel. “Tort Law as a Tool for Mitigating Catastrophic Risk from AI.” January 2024.
Choi, Bryan H. “Negligence Liability for AI Developers.” Lawfare. September 2024.
Sharkey, Catherine. “Products Liability for Artiﬁcial Intelligence.” Lawfare. September 2024.
58
Ramakrishnan, Ketan et al. “US Tort Liability for Large-Scale Artiﬁcial Intelligence Damages: A Primer for
Developers and Policymakers.” RAND Corporation. August 2024.
59
Safe and Secure Innovation for Frontier Artiﬁcial Intelligence Models Act (SB 1047). California Senate, 20232024 legislative session.
55
56

These standards were codified in 1964 by the American Law Institute—the above-mentioned
private governance body—in its Restatement (Second) of Torts. Within a few years, they were
recognized by most states across the country as the law of the land. Section 402(A) of the second
Restatement, which most directly codified this change to tort law, has been described as “the
most cited section of any [American Law Institute] Restatement,” and gave birth to an immense
body of subsequent case law.60 61 While tort law originates in the ancient (or at least old)
common law tradition, the system as it exists today was very much the result of a deliberate and
top-down effort.
The consequences of this effort were profound. Some argue that it was necessary to incentivize
firms to internalize the negative effects their products had on society, and to invest in superior
safety practices. Others argue that it creates a “lottery,” in which companies are held responsible
essentially at random for harms alleged by sympathetic victims, regardless of how much
culpability the company really had for the harm.62
One observation that is near-indisputable is that tort liability as it existed by the 1980s caused a
panic in the insurance market. Manufacturers of vaccines, airplanes, sports equipment,
practitioners of a diversity of medical services, providers of day care, municipalities, and a great
many other entities found themselves unable to afford—or sometimes even to receive—
insurance, owing to the immense uncertainty created by the liability system.63
Substantial reforms have been made to tort systems throughout the United States since the 1980s
and proceeding through the 2000s, primarily to deal with what many saw as excesses of the
original system.
The vast majority of tort cases result in either dismissal or settlement; vanishingly few proceed to
trial. This means that almost none of the harms contemplated by tort law result in a courtmediated fact-finding procedure, and that almost none of them result in precedent to guide other
courts (a key feature and benefit of the common law). When cases do proceed to trial, courts
Vandall, Frank J. “Constructing Products Liability: Reforms in Theory and Procedure.” Villanova Law Review,
Volume 48, Issue 3. 2003.
61
It is worth noting that Section 402(A), and all of the Restatement (Second) of Torts, have been superseded
by the Restatement (Third) of Torts: Products Liability in 1997.
62
For reading in favor of the mid-century tort law changes, it is best to look to its architects:
Escola v. Coca Cola Bottling Co., 24 Cal.2d 453, 150 P.2d 436 (Cal. 1944) (Traynor, J., concurring)
Greenman v. Yuba Power Products, Inc., 59 Cal.2d 57, 27 Cal. Rptr. 697, 377 P.2d 897 (Cal. 1963)
Calabresi, Guido. The Costs of Accidents. 1970.
60

For reading opposed:
Huber, Peter W. Liability: The Revolution and Its Consequences. 1990.
Kagan, Robert A. Adversarial Legalism: The American Way of Law. 2001.
Epstein, Richard A. “Products Liability as an Insurance Market.” The Journal of Legal Studies, Volume 14,
Number 3. December 1985.
63
Priest, George L. “The Current Insurance Crisis and Modern Tort Law.” The Yale Law Journal, Volume 96,
Number 7. June 1987.

(judges and juries selected at random) have been known to award strikingly disparate damages
for similar harms, which raises questions about how well the system prices the negative
externalities it is supposed to cause firms to internalize.
Moreover, while estimates vary, most agree that roughly 50% of the monetary compensation
awarded in tort litigation is paid to victims, with the rest going to lawyers’ fees, administrative
costs, and other ancillary expenses.64 Other victim compensation schemes, such as the Vaccine
Injury Compensation Program,65 which is an administrative alternative to tort liability, are
estimated to deliver 85% of damages to victims. Thus, tort liability does not always deliver on its
promise of providing just compensation to victims of corporate misfeasance or incentivizing
firms to internalize their negative externalities.
On the other hand, the more recent reforms to the tort system do seem to have resulted in a more
predictable, coherent system. Many states have capped non-economic and punitive damages,
modified standards for negligence, heightened standards for scientific evidence, and provided
defenses for companies whose products were approved or otherwise complied with federal
regulator standards.66 While complex and multi-dimensional, these reforms generally bring tort
law in line with its original intended public-policy purpose.
Common law solutions to emerging technologies also have the distinct advantage of allowing the
law to adapt iteratively to harms as they manifest themselves in the real world.67 This is often
preferable to politicians writing preemptive laws meant to address imagined and hypothetical
risks.68
Common law and tort liability therefore have a vital role to play in the governance of frontier AI
and many other emerging technologies likely to be associated with it (consumer robotics,
autonomous vehicles and drones, etc.). Throughout the economy, individuals and businesses are
sure to use AI systems, both digital and physical, to engage in a kaleidoscopic and unpredictable
variety of conduct. Some of this conduct will cause harms. Tort liability is reasonably well suited
to contend with these harms.
The more specific question considered by this paper, however, is whether tort liability should
play a predominant (or any) role in the governance of frontier AI development. It is here that tort
liability shows its weaknesses most acutely.

Congressional Budget O:ice. “The Economics of US Tort Liability: A Primer,” page xi. 2003.
Itself a federal workaround created to make vaccines viable to manufacture and sell in the United States a8er
tort liability made such ac:vity much more diﬃcult.
66
McQuillan, Lawrence J. and Hovannes Abramyan. US Tort Liability Index: 2010 Report. Paciﬁc Research
Institute. 2010.
67
Shavell, Steven. “Liability for Harm Versus Regulation of Safety.” The Journal of Legal Studies, Volume 13,
Number 2. June 1984.
68
Calabresi, Guido. A Common Law for the Age of Statutes. Harvard University Press. 1982.
64
65

The question principally centers on misuse by customers and third-party harm resulting from that
misuse. No one disputes that if an employee slips and falls in the OpenAI headquarters, the
company should face potential premises liability. More seriously, few would dispute that if an
OpenAI model, in testing for autonomy capabilities, were to exfiltrate itself from its secure
testing environment and begin defrauding unsuspecting people on the internet (for example),
OpenAI could and likely should face tort liability for this.
But such harms are not the focus of liability-related frontier AI governance proposals like SB
1047. Instead, those proposals focus on the use of negligence liability on frontier AI developers
to police harms caused to third parties by customer misuse. That is, developers would be
expected to adhere to a standard of care that would be defined by judges and juries in the context
of tort litigation. If developers met or exceeded this standard of care, they would not face
liability. If they were found to have acted beneath this standard, they would face liability.
In contemplating the potential consequences of this legal standard being applied to frontier AI
development, it is important to remember that AI is a platform or foundational technology. That
is, AI will eventually constitute a new substrate of technology embedded across civilization, in
turn enabling all (or practically all) social, economic, scientific, and technological activity that
takes place above it. In addition to being a consumer and business technology, it is likely to
become a kind of new computing primitive—a new foundation on top of which all software is
built.69 Its structural role will be similar to that of other platform technologies such as the
internet, electricity, telecommunications networks, and (in an earlier era) the railroad.
All of the providers of these platform technologies enjoy significant or near-total protections
from tort liability arising from misuse. If I use the phone system to defraud thousands of people,
the victims have no recourse to sue the phone company. An electricity company can be held
liable (often in strict liability) if its transmission lines fail due to improper maintenance and
cause a fire;70 but it would be incoherent to speak of suing the power company because one of
their customers misused electricity.71 Similarly, if a Google AI data center were to explode due to
negligent management of the facility, damaging a home on an adjacent property, most would
intuitively agree that Google should be held liable.
America does not grant tort liability protections to providers of platform technologies lightly, or
out of some sense of libertarian largesse. Indeed, many of these industries are among the most
highly regulated in American economic life. Instead, these liability protections recognize a basic
fact: the technologies in question are so fundamental and so immensely wide-ranging in their
conceivable uses (and misuses) that their harms (often grave and life-threatening harms) are
A speculative but enlightening discussion on this topic is available from OpenAI Co-Founder Andrej
Karpathy in his lecture “Intro to Large Language Models.”
70
In fact, even electricity outages are generally not actionable under private tort causes. See Waldon v.
Arizona Public Service Co., No. 14-55076 (9th Cir. 2016).
71
Though in principle, every crime committed with a computer is a misuse of electricity.
69

better addressed through statute and regulation than through tort litigation. Forcing providers of
these technologies to internalize “their” negative externalities, if those externalities include user
misuse, is akin in the limit to forcing them to internalize the negative externalities of civilization
itself. And this, of course, no firm can do.
Ironically, State Senator Scott Wiener epitomized the dangers of an approach like this just one
year after he introduced SB 1047 with another bill called SB 222,72 which would allow tort
lawsuits against fossil fuel companies for the January 2025 Los Angeles wildfires, on the theory
that the burning of fossil fuels caused climate change, which in turn caused the wildfires and the
resultant property damage. The logical flaws in this chain of causation are numerous,73 but they
also reveal something deeper: an enormous range of legitimate harms can be tied back to the
firms that provide or manufacture such fundamental technologies.
The fact that the technology under examination here is the development of mechanized
intelligence makes liability a particularly perilous tool (if, that is, we care about that technology
continuing to be developed by American companies). Liability doctrines rely upon the question
of whether a harm was reasonably foreseeable to the manufacturer, or in this case, to the
developer. A railroad may be fundamental to civilization, but its range of foreseeable (and even
unforeseeable) misuses and harms is considerably more limited than intelligence—the ability to
recognize patterns and solve problems. Given that intelligence undergirds literally all human
action, it is hard to demarcate what, exactly would not be reasonably foreseeable to the company
that developed human-level mechanized intelligence.
Imagine a bizarre world where, somehow, the American tort liability system exists, but humans
are still basically apes—we have no higher cognitive faculties. Then one day, a person finds a
spring with miraculous water that gives those who drink it full human intelligence. The person
fences off the spring and begins selling the water to the other, still-pre-rational homo sapiens.
Should the person who stumbled on the spring have liability exposure for everything everyone
does with human intelligence for all time? Not, this paper contends, if we want there to be a
cognition industry for very long.
One does not need to cast judgments on tort liability in general. One simply needs to concur that
it is a suboptimal way of governing user misuse of platform technologies, a fact which is
reflected by a century of American technology policy.
There are more practical considerations as well. Any liability regime for frontier AI development
would likely amount to de facto strict liability (liability that obtains regardless of how much care
Climate Disasters: Civil Actions (SB 222). California Senate, 2025-2026 legislative session.
With many arguing that the state’s own insurance policies, public land mismanagement, and electrical
infrastructure maintenance practices were far more likely causes. See e.g. Handmer, Casey. “The Los Angeles
Wildﬁres Are Self-Inﬂicted.”
Powell, Lars et al. “Rethinking Prop 103’s Approach to Insurance Regulation.” International Center for Law &
Economics. November 2023.
72
73

the developer exercised) for open-source and open-weight models. It will always be possible for
developers to exercise more robust safety and security policies on closed-weight models than
their open-weight counterparts.
Then there is the fact that the tort system, famously, incentivizes legal action against the party
with the greatest financial resources, and not always the party that is most culpable for the harm
in question.74 In cases involving AI systems, this is often likely to be the frontier model
developer. Take, for example, the recent Chinese AI agent product called Manus. This was a
computer-using agent that attracted attention for its novel capabilities but also concern about its
lack of safeguards. The system was marketed (primarily to Westerners) by a Chinese startup
called Monica AI and featured models made by Alibaba (a large Chinese technology firm) and
the US frontier AI developer Anthropic.
If a firm had deployed this system in a way that caused a plausibly tortious harm, the easiest
legal target by far is Anthropic, regardless of how culpable Anthropic had been in creating the
harm. These dynamics would no doubt structure the incentives of potential litigants, given that
the time and cost of entering into tort litigation is substantial. The system incentivizes would-be
litigants to file suits most likely to earn compensatory relief, and not necessarily most likely to
assign negative externalities to the most appropriate actor.
Finally, there is the simple fact that a frontier AI governance system based on tort litigation
exposes the industry—and thereby the entire economy—to a great deal of uncertainty. If
policymakers choose to let the status quo persist (in which tort liability of some form likely
obtains), or if they explicitly opt for a liability-first AI governance regime (with laws such as SB
1047), then the first substantive AI governance standards are likely to be written by judges and
juries with no particular expertise on the topic.
Not only will the authors be randomly chosen. So too will their subject matter, defined as tort
litigation outcomes are by the peculiar facts of the cases at hand. This is a substantial risk. It may
be a risk America could bear in normal conditions, but one must not forget that AI is being
developed in the context of a heated geopolitical competition with China and, plausibly, other
countries. In AI development, every month matters. One case, one court, one bad ruling could
easily be enough to take the American AI industry off of its current development trajectory and
cadence for far more than one month. Too, it could indelibly shape the future development of the
technology with judicial doctrine that is fundamentally unknowable in advance. This is an
exceptionally high level of risk to tolerate.
There can be little argument that tort liability will play a meaningful and positive role in the
overall governance of AI (especially at the deployment, or use, layer) and of the many

Schwartz, Victor E. et al. “Deep Pocket Jurisprudence: Where Tort Law Should Draw the Line.” Oklahoma
Law Review, Volume 70, Number 2. 2018.
74

technologies AI will enable. But for frontier AI development, tort liability is ill-suited for reasons
both structural and practical.
3.3 International Governance
Many academics and industry leaders, from Nobel Prize Winner Geoffrey Hinton75 to OpenAI
CEO Sam Altman76 and others,77 have advocated for some kind of global governance system to
oversee advanced AI. While these esteemed figures may be correct that AI systems may one day
reach a level of capability so extreme as to require such an arrangement, there is currently no
path to achieving it.
Global affairs today are characterized by increasing strife, competition, and, indeed, the fraying
of international governance institutions of all kinds. The United States and China, the two
leading countries in the development of artificial intelligence, are engaged in a protracted
struggle over a wide variety of geopolitical conflicts; technical and governance standards for
emerging technologies are one of them. The political tenor of our age, unfortunately, does not
lend itself well to ambitious global coordination and governance.
Any consideration of international AI governance must also grapple seriously with the tension
between controlling advanced AI and recognizing the sovereignty of all countries on Earth. AI
will be a general-purpose, civilizational fundament. It is the right of each country to choose how
they wish to use the technology, within exceptionally wide bounds limited only by truly
catastrophic or existential harms. How such bounds would be policed without the
implementation of a global surveillance system over all uses of AI remains to be seen. In other
words, it remains to be seen whether any kind of robust and durable global governance regime is
even possible, let alone politically achievable.
While this paper does not dispute the prudence of diplomatic efforts related to international AI
governance, it argues that America’s efforts toward frontier AI governance are best channeled
toward domestic efforts. Ideally, those domestic efforts would be designed to be easily
exportable to other countries should the opportunity and mutual desire arise. There may be
narrow windows of opportunity in the future for international AI governance cooperation, and
those windows are most likely to be seized by the United States if the country already has welldeveloped, demonstrably functional governance practices in place. Because private governance
organizations operate more readily across international lines than do governments, this paper
argues that the governance approach most likely to facilitate international collaboration in the
long term is private governance.

Hinton, Geo:rey. 2024 Nobel Prize in Physics Banquet Speech.
Sam Altman remarks to United States Senate Judiciary Committee, Subcommittee on Privacy, Technology,
and the Law. Tech Policy Press.
77
Bengio, Yoshua et al. “Managing Extreme AI Risks Amid Rapid Progress.” Science. May 2024.
75
76

Private Governance: An Adaptable Framework
4.1 An Outline of the Proposal
We have already considered traditional regulation, compute governance, governance by tort
liability, and international governance, and found all four solutions to be wanting in various
important ways.
This paper proposes a hybrid public-private governance framework for frontier AI development.
The basic structure is as follows:
1. A legislature authorizes a government commission to license private AI standards-setting
and regulatory organizations. These licenses are granted to organizations with technical
and legal credibility, and with demonstrated independence from industry.
2. AI developers, in turn, can opt in to receiving certifications from those private bodies.
The certifications verify that an AI developer meets technical standards for security and
safety published by the private body. The private body periodically (once per year)
conducts audits of each developer to ensure that they are, in fact, meeting the standards.
3. In exchange for being certified, AI developers receive safe harbor from all tort liability
related to misuse by others that results in tortious harm.
4. The authorizing government body periodically audits and re-licenses each private
regulatory body.
5. If an AI developer behaves in a way that would legally qualify as reckless, deceitful, or
grossly negligent, the safe harbor does not apply.
6. The private governance body can revoke an AI developer’s safe harbor protections for
non-compliance.
7. The authorizing government body has the power to revoke a private regulator’s license if
they are found to have behaved negligently (for example, ignoring instances of developer
non-compliance).
The proposal’s primary incentive for joining is the safe harbor from tort liability for model
misuse by others. Because of this, the authorizing government body and the private governance
organizations would ideally be focused on mitigating tort-related risks (physical injury, loss of or
damage to physical or digital property) and achieving an elevated standard of care.
The authorizing government body can (and ideally, should) authorize multiple private
governance organizations. This has several benefits. First, it permits competition among private
governance bodies, mitigating against the tendency of regulation to gradually increase in
complexity and compliance cost over time.

Second, competition among private governance organizations allows innovation and
experimentation in the design and implementation of governance. One core thesis undergirding
this proposal is that advanced AI will itself be a breakthrough governance technology, enabling
new ways for regulatory organizations to design standards (say, by the automated creation of AI
model evaluations) and enforce them (for example, through automated monitoring facilitated by
tightly bound AI agents).
Third, the authorization of multiple private governance organizations avoids the one-size-fits-all
nature of technocratic regulation when it is promulgated by a singular government entity.
Instead, it allows institutional entrepreneurs to carve out “niches” in the “governance
marketplace.” Perhaps there will be a need for startups marketing agents, based on heavily
modified foundation models, to have their own private governance organization. Open-source
and open-weight models could be subject to standards of their own, reflecting the distinct
differences in practical governance solutions with closed-source models. New markets that
develop over time, such as robotics or biological foundation models, could be served with
dedicated governance organizations, rather than having to be squeezed into some pre-existing
regulatory design.
Because the majority of legislative efforts on AI have taken place at the state government level
so far,78 this proposal is designed to accommodate implementation by state or federal
governments. Specifically, the private governance bodies are intended to operate across state
lines. Thus, state governments can enact frontier AI governance (satisfying a key demand of
voters) while avoiding the creation of a state-by-state compliance patchwork.
Ideally, however, this proposal would be enacted by the federal government, which can ensure
that one nationwide legal standard obtains (as opposed to some states with tort liability safe
habor and private governance, and some states with the status quo or alternative governance
regimes), and has the most relevant expertise to certify the private governance bodies
responsibly.
Additional detail on the core structural elements of the proposal follows.
4.2 The Authorizing Government Body
The government body that authorizes private governance organizations is the key public
oversight mechanism in this proposal, and the source of all authority vested in the private
governance organizations. It is the heart of what makes this proposal a hybrid, rather than a
purely private, governance arrangement.
The membership, powers, and constraints on the authorizing government body are therefore key.
As envisioned by this proposal, the authorizing government body would be a multi-member
commission, with fixed members representing government agencies with special expertise in AI
78

Multistate.AI. “AI Legislation.” March 2025.

(for example, the Director of NIST or of the US AI Safety Institute, the Director of the White
House Office of Science and Technology Policy, etc.) as well as members appointed by Congress
and the President (or, in the event of a state implementation, the Governor and the state
legislature).
A state government implementation would also need different fixed committee members, since
there is no analog to the science and technology-focused positions mentioned above in states.
These fixed roles could include the Attorney General, leaders of in-state public research
universities, and others. In both state and federal implementations, the appointed members would
ideally come from outside of government, and represent, for example, the academic and research
communities.
The central power granted to this body is the ability to review and approve applications from
private governance bodies, investigatory powers to determine if a private governance body has
behaved negligently, and the capacity to revoke a governance body’s certification license. In the
ideal implementation of this proposal, the application review process would be narrowly focused
on the technical capability of the applicant to conduct the certifications it envisions. The priority
of all parties—the private governance organizations and the authorizing government body
alike—would be on the mitigation of plausible tort-related harm, most notably loss of property
and physical harm.
All other considerations should be explicitly disallowed by any statutory implementation of this
proposal, unless the proposal is modified to provide liability protections in analogous legal
domains. For example, if legislators wish for this proposal to be adapted to mitigating
algorithmic bias, protections from liability under civil rights law would need to be added or to
replace the tort liability protections. As designed, this proposal is focused on the mitigation of
tort harm-related risks, and its incentive for joining is intended to be analogous to these intended
risks.
To mitigate against mission creep and political interference, the authorizing government body’s
powers should remain both significant and narrow. It should retain an absolute right to certify
and decertify private governance organizations, and to conduct relevant investigations into the
conduct of the organizations and the firms they certify. But the authorizing government body
should not, for example, be granted broad rulemaking authority.
The authorizing government body has the power to revoke a private governance organization’s
license in the event that negligence or misfeasance is discovered. Doing so would eliminate tort
liability protections for all companies covered by that private governance organization. This
mechanism is intended to prevent a “race to the bottom,” where frontier AI developers flock to
whichever regulatory body is perceived as most lenient.
Say, for example, that Company A and Company B are both frontier AI model developers
seeking certification from Private Regulator C, who is known to be the most lenient in the

governance market. If Company B’s models, poorly overseen by Private Regulator C, cause a
major harm, the authorizing government body can revoke Private Regulator C’s license, which
will also remove liability protections from Company A. Thus, Companies A and B alike have an
incentive to avoid piling into a knowingly lax private governance body. This a blunt instrument,
but it is designed to ensure that the authorizing government body only revokes licenses in the
event of serious misconduct.
4.3 The Private Governance Bodies
The private governance bodies perform the vast bulk of the work envisioned by this proposal.
Their function is to develop technical standards, model evaluations, auditing and monitoring
mechanisms, and other governance mechanisms to ensure that frontier AI firms and models meet
an elevated standard of care.
The proposal envisions minimal regulations or restrictions on how these private bodies would go
about their tasks, beyond the oversight (both ad hoc and scheduled, as mandated by the periodic
license reviews) by the authorizing government body. This lack of prescriptive rules is very
much by design. As mentioned above, a motivating thesis for this proposal is that advanced AI is
likely to transform the task of governance itself. Generalist AI agents are likely to radically
increase the cognitive labor capabilities of small teams of humans, as well as, in the long term,
the optimal configuration of organizations themselves.79
The creation of new, private organizations to experiment with different regulatory approaches
and institutional designs, and the competition between those private organizations, is intended to
facilitate the societal discovery of new ways to govern with advanced AI.
As Gillian Hadfield and Jack Clark80 put it in their “Regulatory Markets” paper, which is among
the largest sources of inspiration for this proposal:
"Private regulators could use conventional regulatory tools—establishing written requirements,
monitoring for compliance with those requirements, and penalizing violations—but we also
expect that private regulators would develop new regulatory technologies... Such technologies
could themselves be data-intensive and deploy AI methods."
And:
"In any given domain, multiple regulators are licensed so that they compete to provide regulatory
services to targets. Targets must choose a regulator but they have the capacity to choose, and
This would not be new in the history of general-purpose technologies. For example, the railroad and
telegraph created novel demands on ﬁrms that gave rise to the modern managerial corporation. A similar
transformation, into some unpredictable new form, is likely to occur with advanced AI. For more on the
development of the modern managerial corporation, see:
Chandler Jr., Alfred D. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business. 1977.
80
Clark is a co-founder of Anthropic, a frontier AI development ﬁrm that would be a covered entity in the
proposal described here.
79

switch, regulators. They do so by comparing across regulators in terms of the cost and efficiency
of the services provided by regulators."81
The objective of the regulatory market envisioned in this proposal is to protect against tortrelated harms before they happen. In that sense, the regulatory structure proposed is preemptive.
Over time, as more real-world data on usage, risks, and harms become available, lawmakers
could set specific targets by which to measure the performance of private regulators (for
example, the number of incidents resulting in damage to property or physical injury stemming
from models developed by covered firms).
Because this system of regulatory markets exists alongside the existing legal status quo, there are
two levels of competition envisioned. One is the competition within the regulatory market, as
already described. The other is the competition of the regulatory market as a whole with the
status quo. Some believe that the existing system of tort liability is not just a more effective, but
also a lighter-touch, way of achieving harm reduction from frontier AI systems. This contention
should itself be put to a kind of market test, by allowing firms to assess the relative merits of
each system for themselves. This proposal enables such a test to be conducted.
One key challenge with the private governance organizations proposed here will be ensuring
their independence from industry while also allowing the organizations to recruit the requisite
human capital. It is probable that at least some of the expertise needed to run a well-functioning
private governance body would come from the frontier AI industry. These individuals may well
have direct or indirect financial exposure to one or more frontier AI development firms.
Potential solutions to this problem include divestment requirements, a mandate that employees
with recent frontier AI industry experience may not serve on private governance body boards,
and a statutorily defined maximum ratio of private governance body staff with industry
experience. The routine audits envisioned by the proposal could also be tailored to monitor this
issue in particular.
4.4 Liability Protections
The problems with tort liability for user misuse of platform technologies like frontier AI are
discussed above in Section 3.2. Rather than reiterating those problems here, this section will
explore the mechanics of the envisioned liability protections as well as some of the parameters
policymakers could consider adjusting while preserving the basic spirit of the proposal.
First, the liability protections apply only to liability in tort, and only to harms arising from user
misuse of a frontier model. They do not apply to standard corporate tort liability exposure
(premises liability, workplace harms, or other forms of traditional corporate liability), nor do they
apply to any statutory liability companies may face (civil rights, consumer protection,
environmental regulations, and other large bodies of law). Tort liability exposure is also
81

Hadﬁeld, Gillian and Jack Clark. “Regulatory Markets: The Future of AI Governance.” 2023.

preserved for harms stemming from first-party use of frontier models (e.g. an internal
deployment of a model that exfiltrates itself from its secure environment and commits tortious
acts against third parties).
Second, while a full safe harbor from user-misuse-related tort liability is ideal for creating an
incentive for firms to participate, it is not the only option. The safe harbor could be modified
such that it only applies to harms below a certain objective count, for example incidents
involving property damage of less than $500 million82 or deaths below a threshold. Above that
threshold, the protection could shift to a rebuttable presumption of reasonable care on the part of
the developer, or protections could be eliminated altogether.
Third, the rebuttable presumption could also be expanded to cover all tort liability claims. That
is, rather than a full safe harbor, the liability protections could take the form of a rebuttable
presumption against all claims. This would soften the protections, quite possibly to the point that
some number of industry actors would decline to participate in the regulatory market. But in all
likelihood, the broader spirit of the proposal would be maintained, especially if it were
implemented with a rebuttable presumption at the federal level.
4.5 Structural and Technical Considerations
From the perspective of institutional economics, this proposal has four key advantages over
traditional forms of regulation:
1. Lower transaction costs: This proposal lowers the transaction costs associated with
frontier AI governance on the theory that private transacting bodies (covered firms and
private governance bodies) can define, monitor, and enforce rules among themselves
more cheaply than traditional government regulatory bodies.83
2. Information asymmetries: While information asymmetries will likely persist between
frontier AI firms and any governance body, these asymmetries will likely be lower
between a frontier AI firm and a private governance body with a tailor-made structure,
specialized expertise, and more sophisticated ability to use technology to facilitate AI
governance.
3. Heterogeneity: Because the AI industry is diverse, a flexible private system will be
better able to serve a variety of governance needs, as opposed to a one-size-fits-all
traditional regulatory solution.
4. Reputation mechanisms: Frontier AI firms are likely to rely heavily upon their
reputations to successfully market large-scale knowledge work automation to corporate
customers, especially those in regulated industries. By providing a quasi-government
certification to AI developers who participate successfully in the regulatory market, this
Though estimating damages is di:icult in the absence of litigation, which this proposal is intended to avoid.
If a damages threshold were to be implemented, some neutral third party would need to be speciﬁed in
statute to evaluate damages prior to litigation.
83
Williamson, Oliver E. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. 1985.
82

proposal creates a reputational mechanism that may be far more valuable to AI industry
actors than a standard government fine.84
Though the proposal described here is imperfect (like all governance regimes), it meaningfully
advances upon the status quo of traditional regulation in all ways outlined above.
Conclusion
This paper has attempted to grapple seriously with the concept of frontier AI governance. It has
tried to elucidate what frontier AI governance is likely to mean in practice, and what even a wellimplemented governance system can realistically be expected to achieve. No perfect order is
imagined here, but neither is perfect control by the state or any other authority. Instead, this
proposal offers modest order in the form of protection from the most dire conceivable harms
from frontier AI. The conception of frontier AI governance offered here takes all three of
political economy, liberty, and major AI risks seriously.
It then navigates one-by-one through the major forms of proposed frontier AI governance:
traditional government regulation, compute governance, governance by tort liability, and
international governance. It finds each of these wanting or lacking in important ways while
dismissing none of them altogether. But ultimately, this paper concludes that something new will
be needed to achieve sound frontier AI governance in short order.
The private governance system outlined includes safeguards against both corruption and overregulation. It is designed to mitigate only the gravest potential harms from frontier AI, while
leaving other harms to the prudent enforcement of existing law, or to the passage of new statutes.
Beyond ensuring the mitigation of harms, the priority of this proposal is to incentivize
institutional innovation in American governance. The author anticipates that lessons learned and
experience gained from the implementation of this proposal will have numerous applications to
other domains of American statecraft.
Ultimately, no governance system can be wisely put into practice without virtuous leadership and
prudent enforcement. That is true for this proposal as well. Though it is designed with
safeguards, it could well fall prey to the many perils facing any governance system: corruption,
undue risk aversion, torpor, and the proliferation of needless complexity. Avoiding these pitfalls
is often a problem of culture, not a problem susceptible to clever technocratic tweaks. The
culture of American statecraft has seen better days. By trying something new, in the spirit of
experimentation and discovery, with the gravity of the task before us in mind, perhaps culture,
too, can be renewed.

Tirole, Jean. “A Theory of Collective Reputations (with Applications to the Persistence of Corruption and to
Firm Quality.” The Review of Economic Studies, Volume 63, Number 1. January 1996.
84

