ControlAI 2025 Impact
Report: our progress toward
an international ban on ASI
by Andrea_Miotti, Alex Amadori
27th Mar 2026
AI Alignment Forum
Linkpost for controlai.com
This post highlights a few key excerpts from our full impact report. You can read the full
report at https://controlai.com/impact-report-2025.
ControlAI is a non-profit organization working to avert the extinction risks posed by
superintelligence. We help hundreds of thousands of people understand these risks and
meet hundreds of lawmakers to inform them, without mincing words, about what is at
stake.
In little more than a year, we briefed over 200 parliamentarians, built a coalition of 110+
UK lawmakers recognizing superintelligence as a national security threat, led to
two debates in the UK House of Lords, and our work led to a series of hearings on AI
risk and superintelligence at the Canadian Parliament. These hearings included
testimonies from me (Andrea) and Samuel at ControlAI, Connor Leahy, Malo Bourgon
(MIRI), Max Tegmark and Anthony Aguirre (FLI), David Krueger, and more.
The report covers results between December 2024 and January 2026. As of posting this
in March 2026, we've now briefed 279 lawmakers and 90+ US congressional offices.
In only the last 2 months, we've scaled in Canada and Germany from ~50 to 100+
lawmakers briefed, despite us only having one staffer in each country.
[1]
AI Governance
Politics
AI
World Optimization
Frontpage
81
4/20/26, 10:11 PM
ControlAI 2025 Impact Report: our progress toward an international ban on ASI — LessWrong
https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/BwfydMhjuroqiZs4x/controlai-2025-impact-report
1/7

Moving forward, we plan to significantly expand our work in the US, accelerate our
progress from awareness to policy action and establish a presence in all other G7
countries.
ControlAI's mission
ControlAI’s mission is to avert the extinction risks posed by superintelligence.
Nobel Prize winners, top AI experts and even the CEOs of major AI companies have
warned that superintelligence poses an extinction risk for humanity. Yet, most decision-
makers and most of the public are still in the dark about these risks.
To avert these risks, we need to prevent the development of superintelligence. We tackle
this problem in a direct and straightforward way: meet all relevant actors in the
democratic process, inform them of the risks and the solutions, and ask them to take
action on this issue, systematically and repeatedly.
We help hundreds of thousands of people understand the extinction risk posed by
superintelligence, and to take civic action. We meet hundreds of lawmakers to inform
them, without mincing words, about the risks of superintelligence. We help lawmakers
speak out publicly and push for concrete measures to prevent superintelligence,
nationally and internationally.
We often meet lawmakers who had never heard of the risks of superintelligence
before our meeting, and walk out with them supporting our campaign.
In the UK, we started out with cold outreach to all lawmakers, and one year later we
have a coalition of over 110 lawmakers recognizing superintelligence as a national
security threat, which has already led to two debates in the UK parliament on
superintelligence and extinction risk.
We are now expanding our model to other countries, including the US, Canada and
Germany. The early results, which we present in this document, show that our playbook
can be replicated across borders.
We produced these results with a team of fewer than 15 people, operating on a
small budget compared to the scale of the problem. Our methods have significant
room to scale with more resources.
4/20/26, 10:11 PM
ControlAI 2025 Impact Report: our progress toward an international ban on ASI — LessWrong
https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/BwfydMhjuroqiZs4x/controlai-2025-impact-report
2/7

Our Results Last Year
Lawmaker outreach
~1 in 2 UK lawmakers we brief go on to support our campaign
110+ UK lawmakers supported our campaign
2 Parliamentary debates on superintelligence and AI extinction risk
Media & content creator outreach
18 Media publications on risk from superintelligent AI resulting from our work
14 Videos published in collaboration with content creators totaling 20+ million
subscribers
Public awareness campaign and lawmaker engagement tools
160,000+ Messages sent to US and UK lawmakers from constituents about
superintelligence extinction risk
30,000+ People who contacted their lawmakers through our tools in the US and UK
Theory of Change
The awareness gap
In order to establish strong international coordination to prevent superintelligence,
countries will need resources like funding, political will, diplomatic leverage, and
sustained attention from capable people.
Only deep awareness of superintelligence and its risks will justify such investments in
the eyes of these actors. Without genuine understanding and conviction, individuals and
countries will not bear the real costs needed to solve the problem, nor remain vigilant as
AI development evolves and political or economic circumstances change.
4/20/26, 10:11 PM
ControlAI 2025 Impact Report: our progress toward an international ban on ASI — LessWrong
https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/BwfydMhjuroqiZs4x/controlai-2025-impact-report
3/7

Right now, that awareness barely exists. Decision makers and the public across countries
are largely unaware of the extinction risk it poses. When we started, virtually no one was
bringing the extinction risk from superintelligence directly to lawmakers.
Building this awareness at scale, among both decision makers and the public, is the
necessary first step for any meaningful action on superintelligence.
In order to kickstart the kind of international coordination needed to prevent
superintelligence from being built, we need to rally a critical mass of countries that take
the risks of superintelligence at least as seriously as they take the threat of nuclear war
today, and that treat its development as they would any other severe threat to national
security.
Building the coalition
With sufficient buy-in, the next steps become possible. Informed governments backed
by public demand for action can pursue concrete policy measures: national legislation
prohibiting the development of superintelligence, and international agreements modeled
on existing nonproliferation and WMD-prevention frameworks.
These measures can be achieved by a powerful coalition of countries that
understands superintelligence as a vital threat to their national security, and treat
its development as they would any other severe security threat.
Such a coalition has a wide range of enforcement tools available, from formal
agreements and inspection regimes to sanctions and multi-lateral monitoring
mechanisms, the same tools that have been used to constrain nuclear proliferation and
other global security threats.
Both superpowers and middle powers are well-positioned to join this effort, as they all
face the universal extinction threat from superintelligence being developed.
ControlAI exists to make sure that a strong coalition of countries rises up to the
challenge of preventing the development of superintelligence.
Our Theory of Change in more detail
This chart describes our theory of change in more detail, and clarifies how our work fits
in it.
4/20/26, 10:11 PM
ControlAI 2025 Impact Report: our progress toward an international ban on ASI — LessWrong
https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/BwfydMhjuroqiZs4x/controlai-2025-impact-report
4/7

Moving forward
4/20/26, 10:11 PM
ControlAI 2025 Impact Report: our progress toward an international ban on ASI — LessWrong
https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/BwfydMhjuroqiZs4x/controlai-2025-impact-report
5/7

In little more than a year, we have proven that directly engaging democratic
institutions on the extinction risk from superintelligence works.
The UK is our proof of concept; we are now replicating this model in the US, Canada,
and Germany. In the UK, where we already helped move the issue of superintelligence
into the halls of politics, 2026 will be the year to translate this momentum into concrete
policy change.
As we scale, we are confident that more resources will translate directly into more
countries where lawmakers understand and act on this threat. We will expand our work
in the US, accelerate our progress from awareness to policy action, and establish a
presence in all other G7 countries.
If you are a donor or partner who wants to help build the coalition that keeps humanity
in control, please get in touch at partners@controlai.com.
1. As of March 2026, a member of our coalition has submitted an amendment to a UK cybersecurity bill
recognizing superintelligent AI as "systems that can autonomously compromise national security,
escape human oversight, and upend international stability". This amendment will be discussed in
the UK Parliament. ↩︎
4 comments, sorted by top scoring
Haiku
13
11
[ ]
-
This is huge progress! Congratulations to the whole ControlAI team, as well as to humanity as a whole
for starting to put up some fight!
Charlotte Brock
9
4
[ ]
-
Great summary of important work being done by ControlAI. Hope you spread the word to many people
and that they in turn spread it to even more. Not enough people are aware of the risks of AGI/ASI. It
should be the most talked-about topic at the dinner table, coffeeshops, and online forums. Not to
mention in policy spaces.
Andrea_Miotti
2
0
[ ]
-
Thanks Charlotte! Yes, a big part of our approach is based on building common knowledge of the risk
of extinction from superintelligence, so people know that other people know about this risk.
21d
19d
12d
4/20/26, 10:11 PM
ControlAI 2025 Impact Report: our progress toward an international ban on ASI — LessWrong
https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/BwfydMhjuroqiZs4x/controlai-2025-impact-report
6/7

More from Andrea_Miotti
View more
Curated and popular this week
Moderation Log
The more people we reach, the faster things can compound.
Barbara Stafford
7
6
[ ]
-
Thank you , ControlAI, for your clear planning and your actions. What is more important work than
making sure the human race (and biological life in general) has a chance to survive?
129
5mo
…
12
46
6mo
…
0
196
1y
…
52
566
3d
58
274
6d
31
575
7d
76
Alex Amadori, Gabriel Alfour, An…
Alex Amadori, Gabriel Alfour, An…
adamShimi, Gabriel Alfour, Conn…
ryan_greenblatt
J Bostock
Eliezer Yudkowsky
20d
How middle powers may prevent the devel
Modeling the geopolitics of AI developme
The Compendium, A full argument about 
Current AIs seem pretty misaligned to me
Ω
Morale
Only Law Can Prevent Extinction
4/20/26, 10:11 PM
ControlAI 2025 Impact Report: our progress toward an international ban on ASI — LessWrong
https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/BwfydMhjuroqiZs4x/controlai-2025-impact-report
7/7
