How to Help
Our plan to address the extinction risks posed by the development of superintelligence is:
Design policies that target ASI development and precursor technologies
Then, convince policymakers in key jurisdictions around the world to implement these policies.
1.
2.
For Step 1, we have written a policy memo on the policies needed to achieve this, and discussed the measures in more detail in A Narrow
Path.
What remains is scaling up the civic engagement necessary for the success of step 2: to promote and implement these policies in as many
countries as possible. As demonstrated by our proof-of-concept campaign in the UK, directly contacting elected representatives works, and
it is possible to push forward the risks from superintelligence and proposed policies.
Our Recommendations
We have tailored policy recommendations for key jurisdictions, as well as policy recommendations for the rest of the world. Recommend
these policies when reaching out to policy makers in your jurisdiction. You can download country-specific policy briefings below: click on the
button of your country.
If you find more than 5 officials interested in our policies and draft bills in your jurisdiction, let us know and we might add your jurisdiction
here.
UK
USA
China
World
State Of AI Regulation
The US has not passed any legislation enforcing regulation of the most powerful AI systems. 
The Trump Administration has revoked the Biden Administration’s primary Executive Order on AI, and has announced the “commitment of
the United States to sustain and enhance America’s dominance in AI to promote human flourishing, economic competitiveness, and national
security.” The Trump Administration, as of this writing, is in the process of developing an AI Action Plan, due 180 days from 23 January 2025;
as of now, its content is uncertain. 
The United States, however, continues to run its US AI Safety Institute, focused on assessing the risks of the most powerful frontier AI
models.
Here is our US policy brief:
Policy Brief
4/21/26, 11:20 AM
How to Help | ControlAI
https://controlai.com/how-to-help/us
1/3

Download Policy Brief
Concrete Actions
Organizations
If you are an organization, you can participate in this civic engagement by doing what we did in your jurisdiction:
Identify the public officials most relevant to AI policy and regulation in the US
Contact the relevant public officials, and for those that are not publicly reachable, leverage your network to reach out and meet them
Make the case about AI risk and the need for targeted regulation
Offer the US policy brief above as a set of concrete policies they can promote and implement
1.
On the legislative side, the contact details of elected officials in the US, Congressmen and Senators, are often available here. You can
contact them directly.
On the executive side, the department that currently mainly owns AI policy and regulation is the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST), as part of the Department of Commerce. Public-facing contact information for some civil servants and other non-
elected officials in this department may not be easy to find.
a.
b.
2.
3.
4.
Once you have contacted more than 5 public officials, you can let us know by reaching out to hello@controlai.com. We will be happy to
schedule a call and provide advice and ideas.
Also, if the public officials you are engaging with are interested in making the policy proposals happen, you can put us in touch with them at 
hello@controlai.com to discuss next steps and concrete legislation proposals.
Individuals
If you’re an individual citizen, the main action you can take is using our automated form to contact your Senators.
You can also look at our resources for supporters for more actions you can take.
If you find yourself overextended or out of your depth with regard to this plan, the arguments for AI risks, or the policy proposals, feel free to
contact us at hello@controlai.com.
Overview Of The US Policy Process
The legislative branch in the US is composed of two houses
The House of Representatives
The Senate
•
•
The executive branch is headed by the President (often referenced by his residence, “the White House”), and the executive departments and
agencies generally report to the President. 
The heads of all executive departments and most agencies are nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate. (Some lesser
offices and most staff roles are nominated by the President, but do not require Senate confirmation.)
The executive branch holds, broadly speaking, national security, regulatory, administrative, trade/commerce, and other domestic federal
powers  
•
Note that some regulatory agencies are quasi-independent, though their constitutional status is complex.
•
•
Any bill must pass through both houses, and either a) receive the President’s signature or b) if the President vetoes the bill by refusing to
sign it, a 2/3rds vote of both houses to override the veto, to become law
4/21/26, 11:20 AM
How to Help | ControlAI
https://controlai.com/how-to-help/us
2/3

Contact
Careers
Socials
Blog
About
Privacy Policy
Note that in the American system, some powers are reserved to the constituent member states of the United States.
Get Updates
Sign up to our newsletter if you'd like to stay updated on our work,
how you can get involved, and to receive a weekly roundup of the latest AI news.
Enter your email
Join the Campaign
4/21/26, 11:20 AM
How to Help | ControlAI
https://controlai.com/how-to-help/us
3/3
