AN ACTIVIST VIEW OF AI GOVERNANCE
AI safety
Existential risk
Policy
AI governance
Political polarization
Frontpage
In my previous post° in this sequence°, I made a fundraising pitch for my organization, the
Center for AI Policy (CAIP), asking readers to donate to us so we can continue lobbying
Congress to pass strong AI safety legislation.
Here, in the second post, I want to zoom out from CAIP’s particular concerns and argue
that the AI safety movement as a whole should be investing far more resources into
“political advertising.” We need to seek out individual politicians and personally let them
know about the risk from misaligned superintelligence and show them what they can do
to mitigate that risk.
The core of my argument for this second post is that AI governance ideas are not self-
enacting: even the best policy ideas need political champions, or they will not become law.
Therefore, to win at AI governance, we have to actively promote and advertise our ideas to
political decisionmakers, not just to academic experts. The expected value of the
movement’s AI governance efforts is something like Q × P, where Q is the quality of our
ideas, and P is the power of our advocacy. If P is zero or close to zero, then it doesn’t matter
how good our ideas are, because our ideas will not steer the future.
If we fail to adequately invest in advertising our ideas, the most likely result is that we’ll
wind up with a glut of ‘orphaned’ AI governance ideas that have been thoroughly
researched and vetted but that don’t impact the real world because they have few or no
champions in the political arena. AI governance researchers will discover great strategies
for saving the world, but nobody will put them into practice, and misaligned AI will
destroy civilization.
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of
7 on AI Governance)
by Jason Green-Lowe
May 20 2025
61
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/LE7xFNwRRpZ8AJSAF
1/12

“AI safety work” can be split into two very broad categories: (1) technical alignment
research and (2) AI governance. 
By “technical alignment,” I mean anything that’s directly aimed at making AI systems
safer, better understood, more reliable, more compatible with human values, or more
controllable. 
Technical alignment is not my field, but from what I can see from the outside, AI scientists
already want to design maximally safe AI. Once AI developers find out how to make AI safe
and compatible with human values at an affordable price, they’ll automatically want to do
that, because the vast majority of computer scientists prefer to have an AI that will be more
reliable (rather than less reliable) at following the spirit of their instructions. Executives
and managers at these companies likewise want AIs that are better at following
instructions.
The problem to be solved in technical alignment is thus primarily a problem about lack of
knowledge. 
If you invent a useful new AI safety technique, you might have to do a little bit of work to
promote the idea at, e.g., machine learning conferences, but for the most part a good
technical idea will spread on its own if you let it. The inventors of the idea have a vested
interest in making sure they get credit for their contribution, and other people have a
vested interest in staying current in their field and using the best-available techniques.
Thus, the hard part in technical safety research is discovering the new ideas, not spreading
the new ideas.
I think it would be perfectly reasonable to hire a few people to promote and spread good AI
alignment ideas, but it doesn’t seem like that’s strictly necessary – most of those ideas will
probably spread on their own, even without any formal advocacy.
Good Technical Alignment Ideas Might
Spread Automatically
Good AI Governance Ideas Won’t Spread
Automatically
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/LE7xFNwRRpZ8AJSAF
2/12

This is definitely not the case for AI governance. By “AI governance,” I mean anything
that’s aimed at controlling what kinds of AI hardware and software gets built, who gets
access to it, how it will be evaluated, and what should happen if an evaluation raises
concerns about an AI system’s safety. 
The premise of AI governance is that AI developers often have bad private incentives that
don’t line up well with what would be best for the public, and so we need to find ways to
correct those incentives. For example, Meta or DeepMind or OpenAI might want to release
their latest AI model immediately, in order to get good PR, boost their quarterly earnings
reports, capture market share from a rival, maximize their own chances of gaining power
with transformative AI, etc. – even if there’s some risk that this model will catastrophically
malfunction. A company that releases a risky model captures most of the model’s upsides
(profit, glory, power, etc.) for itself, but the downsides (bioweapons, loss of human control,
etc.) get shared across all of humanity. As a result, those developers will be strongly
tempted to release a new AI system even when that would yield negative expected utility
for the world.
The most effective way to fix this problem isn’t by doing research about the flawed
incentives – the basic way in which the incentives are flawed is already reasonably well-
understood by all of the relevant parties. There’s no mystery to be solved here: AI developers
have bad private incentives, and so sometimes they’ll act on those incentives and take
actions that are bad for the public. 
This isn’t the kind of problem that can be solved by acquiring better knowledge. Instead,
what AI governance activists need most is better incentives.
Right now, society is encouraging AI developers to train and deploy AI models that are
unreasonably dangerous, so we need to persuade society to stop doing that. Some amount
of research might be useful at the margins in order to better understand how we might
best convince a particular institution (e.g., Congress) to take action to change AI
developers’ incentives…but the research itself won’t automatically solve the problem. 
Unlike brilliant technical innovations, brilliant policy ideas won’t be spontaneously
adopted by the relevant decision-makers, for two reasons. 
Spreading AI Governance Ideas Requires
Overcoming Political Opposition
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/LE7xFNwRRpZ8AJSAF
3/12

The first reason is that the policy space is hotly contested. Very few policy ideas are truly
win-win for all parties, and the parties that expect to lose will do everything they can to
block a policy idea that they see as bad for them. This lines up roughly with “conflict
theory” from Scott Alexander’s conflict theory vs. mistake theory° dichotomy. I don’t
know whether the whole world runs on conflict theory, but parts of DC sure do.
The executives at private AI developers like Meta and OpenAI don’t actually want to be
regulated (at least not in a way that would effectively promote AI safety), because that
would mean sharing some of their power with government officials who they don’t know,
like, or trust. Even if AI safety regulations would be better for society as a whole, they won’t
be seen as better by Sam Altman or Mark Zuckerberg, and those people have enormous
political power that they can and will use to oppose any such regulations. 
In addition to controlling armies of skilled and well-connected lobbyists, famous tech
CEOs often have higher approval ratings and better name-recognition than Congressional
leaders. For example, can you name the current chair of the House Science Committee? If
not, then maybe you understand why he’s reluctant to antagonize Satya Nadella – that’s
not actually a political battle that’s likely to go well for the Science Committee Chair unless
he has a powerful coalition backing him up, or hard evidence of very obvious misconduct
from Microsoft. 
The kind of evidence he would need to win that contest would have to be much less subtle
than “some of Microsoft’s products seem dangerous according to experts.” Instead, it
would have to look something more like “Microsoft is using Windows to secretly steal
money from its customers’ bank accounts.” Otherwise, the media controlled by Microsoft
(including Barron’s, MSN, and HarperCollins Publishers) runs stories reporting on what an
unfair bully the Science Committee Chair is, and those stories probably get repeated by
other media outlets who either sympathize with Big Tech (e.g., the Washington Post, which
is owned by Jeff Bezos), or who simply don’t have time to run an independent
investigation.
So, getting a good regulation enacted that will fix AI developers’ bad incentives isn’t just a
matter of discovering a good regulation and gathering enough evidence to prove to a
neutral observer that the regulation is good for society – it also requires overcoming
political opposition from the stakeholders who have selfish reasons to oppose that
regulation.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/LE7xFNwRRpZ8AJSAF
4/12

Being able to win a debate against Big Tech lobbyists is only the first and smallest step in
overcoming their political opposition. In addition to convincing politicians that AI safety
policies would be good for society, i.e., winning the merits-based argument, we also need
to win some purely political arguments. We need to demonstrate that our preferred
policies enjoy broad and deep support from the general public, or that they are acceptable
to most of the relevant interest groups other than Big Tech, or that they are supported by
relevant campaign donors, or by the relevant Congressional committee chairs, or by other
key allies in or out of Congress. We need to be able to make the case that our bills or other
policy proposals are more likely than not to succeed, because most politicians mostly want
to back winning ideas – they don’t want to invest their limited resources in supporting an
idea (no matter how good it is) that is doomed to stagnate. If you can’t show that your idea
is likely to attract (or already has) a winning political coalition behind it, then many
politicians won’t even consider your idea.
This can be very frustrating for political outsiders, but it’s not all that different from some
of the principles motivating effective altruism: policymakers want to do the most good per
unit of their precious time, and in order to do so, they need to filter ideas based on which
ones seem like they have a chance of succeeding. Backing a politically doomed idea is
typically useless even if, counterfactually, the idea would have helped society if it had been
implemented. 
The second reason why good AI governance ideas don’t spread on their own is that the
policy space is very noisy. There are a lot of different activists and groups at any given time
who are all loudly insisting that their issue is the most important and most urgent issue to
address. Some of them are wrong, some of them are staking out a position based on
subjective values, and some of them are right, but it’s not obvious in advance to any
particular politician that any particular activist is worthy of their time and consideration.
Jack Clark had a great post about this a couple of weeks ago; I largely agree with his
assessment.
A typical Congressional staffer is responsible for five or six different categories of policy:
they might, e.g., make recommendations about which regulations to support in health
care, energy, transportation, senior citizens’ issues, telecommunications, and banking.
Spreading AI Governance Ideas Requires
Overcoming Political Inertia
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/LE7xFNwRRpZ8AJSAF
5/12

Within each of these categories, there are dozens of different sub-topics being considered
at any given time – the “tech and telecom” category might include social media, access to
fiber optic cables, satellite launches, TV advertising, e-mail spam, funding for national
public radio, data privacy, and artificial intelligence. Within a “sub-topic” like artificial
intelligence, there are dozens of different policies being proposed by various stakeholders
– someone wants subsidies for American chip manufacturing, and someone else wants to
combat deepfake pornography, and someone else wants the Social Security
Administration to increase its use of AI while processing disability benefit claims, and then
over in one corner you have a handful of effective altruists arguing for guardrails against
AI’s catastrophic risks. 
Suppose a staffer works overtime and logs 3,000 hours per year. That leaves 500 hours per
policy category (e.g. “tech and telecom”), which gets split across 20 different policy topics
(e.g. “AI”), which gets split across another 25 policy proposals (e.g. “mandatory security
audits for AI”), leaving a grand total of 1 hour per year to consider any given policy
proposal.
During that 1 hour, the staffer won’t be able to give the proposal their undivided attention
– instead, they’re juggling meeting requests, the latest instructions from their Senator, the
breaking political news on CNN and X, and an angry email from an important constituent
who needs to be pacified. So, more realistically, the staffer might have 20 or 30 minutes per
year to think and write about a particular AI safety proposal.
For a long-time reader of this forum, that might be enough time – if you’re already
familiar with how AI works, why AI is dangerous, what other AI safety policy proposals
have been made, etc., then you might be able to evaluate a new proposal in 20 minutes and
write an email recommending it to your boss with the remaining 10 minutes. Similarly, if
you’re one of the handful of staffers in Congress who’s an expert on computer science, you
might do fine.
On the other hand, if (like the median Congressional staffer) you’re a relatively recent
political science graduate who’s never tried to code and never watched a video about neural
networks, 20 minutes probably isn’t nearly enough time to make sense of an average AI
policy proposal. Much of the jargon will be lost on you, you won’t understand the core
concerns that are motivating the policy, and if you try asking your coworkers (who are
much like you) for a second opinion, they’ll probably agree with you that it sounds like
science fiction, i.e., speculative and unlikely to be an immediate problem.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/LE7xFNwRRpZ8AJSAF
6/12

So, most likely, you stop reading the policy proposal halfway through, and you move on to
another task in your extremely busy day. This isn’t the result of nefarious lobbying or
corruption or political opposition – it’s just that politicians have an enormous number of
things that they’re asked to think about, and they can’t be experts on all of them – so
promoting your policy idea to their attention requires active effort and a particular skill
set.
It’s not enough to just articulate a good idea and provide evidence that it’s good; you also
have to do quite a bit of political advertising. Before you can even make the case that your
policy would be good for society, you first have to persuade policymakers that it would be a
good idea for them personally to dedicate enough time and effort to evaluating your policy.
This means distilling the arguments behind that policy into something that can be very
comfortably absorbed by the extroverts who work in politics: possibly a two-page handout
with color graphs and illustrations, but more likely a vivid anecdote or a single punchy
analogy that’s delivered as part of an in-person conversation. 
In order to get a chance to have that in-person conversation, you might need to invite
politicians to a happy hour, or hold a fundraiser for them, or hire lobbyists who know them
personally, or present on a ‘fun’ topic that’s adjacent to AI safety and that will attract
staffers who are bored or tired or depressed or otherwise in need of some relief. You
probably have to go to Capitol Hill in person, repeatedly, and not expect politicians to come
to your office or download your papers. To craft an effective political advertising strategy,
imagine you’re an underpaid, overworked staffer who’s constantly being bombarded by
pleas for attention. You literally don’t have time to meet with everyone who wants to talk to
you. Which meeting invitations will you accept? Chances are, your choices will mostly be
driven by who makes it easy and rewarding for you to talk with them.
That’s why, in order to make sure an AI governance idea succeeds, it’s not enough to simply
research and document the best AI governance ideas – there is also quite a lot of advocacy
work that needs to be done to market those ideas to actual policymakers. 
The need for this advocacy doesn’t line up neatly with either conflict theory or mistake
theory – it’s a third type of problem. This “theory of political advertising” is different from
mistake theory because there’s no amount of patiently researching clever ideas that will
Earning the Chance to Persuade
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/LE7xFNwRRpZ8AJSAF
7/12

cause those ideas to win – in addition to being correct, you also have to be reasonably good
at self-promotion. But the theory of political advertising is also different from conflict
theory, because there’s no evil or selfish opponent to be overcome. We’re not necessarily
enmeshed in a battle; we just need to take the time to build a political coalition that can
promote a bill to the top of Congress’s extremely crowded agenda.
If we don’t successfully promote our ideas to actual policymakers, or if those policymakers
don’t successfully change the incentives of AI developers, then sooner or later (probably
sooner) the developers will recklessly train and deploy misaligned superintelligence, and
most of us will die. 
The private AI developers are a caught in a race with each other where none of them are
able and willing to hold back a model by even three weeks to run all of the tests that they
would need to run to make sure that their current models are reasonably safe. Instead, the
people evaluating new AI models are forced to rush through their work with early-stage
prototypes and inadequate benchmarks, and then when they warn that they can’t be
confident that the models are safe, the developers publish their models anyway.
There is no plan in place that we can trust to cause the developers to suddenly start
exercising more caution as the stakes get progressively higher. Some developers have
published “responsible scaling policies,” but many of these policies aren’t strict enough to
reliably prevent a catastrophe, even if they were fully adhered to. For example, Anthropic
appears to be conceding that it does not expect to be able to protect its model weights
against a concerted hacking attempt by state-level actors, and most companies have not
even set any kind of quantitative target, e.g., less than a 1% chance of causing more than
100 deaths per year, let alone provided evidence tending to show that they are on track to
meet that target.
Of course, there’s no good reason to think that all companies will fully adhere to their
responsible scaling policies. The same pressures that are currently causing companies to
skimp on the evaluations and safeguards they think are needed at, e.g., ASL-2 will probably
also cause companies to skimp on the evaluations and safeguards that they think are
needed at ASL-4. Although the risks of more powerful models will be somewhat more
We Either Solve Bad Incentives, or We
Probably Die
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/LE7xFNwRRpZ8AJSAF
8/12

apparent to tech executives, the benefits of an early deployment of those models will also
be more tempting; instead of just capturing market share, an executive might believe that
early deployment is needed to seize control of the entire future. 
On balance, it doesn’t seem likely that all companies will spontaneously decide to start
being more careful in the future. As I write this, OpenAI is waging a legal campaign to free
itself from as many of the constraints of its nonprofit management as possible, suggesting
that it wants to pursue profits in the future even more recklessly than it is today. Even if
OpenAI sees the light and puts solid guardrails in place, it only takes one company to
defect and (accidentally or otherwise) release an extremely dangerous AI.
What this means in practice is that under the status quo, most of us probably die shortly
after the first AI developer achieves superintelligence. Most types of poorly aligned
superintelligence will instrumentally converge° on power-seeking behaviors that prompt
them to seize the planet’s resources; at a minimum, this means a future where humans are
gradually disempowered and locked out of any important decisions. If the alignment is bad
enough, then superintelligence could easily lead to total human extinction. 
There are no laws in place to prevent this outcome, there is no credible effort to pass such
laws in Congress right now, there is no mass boycott or industry consensus that could
realistically cause all major AI developers to permanently adopt and rigorously adhere to
adequate safety practices, and the handful of attempts to pass state-by-state AI safety
legislation are at risk of being preempted by hostile federal legislation.
We have to change this status quo. 
This means we have to be thinking about, measuring, and promoting AI governance
activities based on their chances of changing this status quo. We don’t have the luxury of
choosing the activities that most interest us, or of choosing the activities that feel most
comfortable. We have to identify the activities that are most likely to change the status quo,
because otherwise there’s an excellent chance that misaligned superintelligence will cause
billions of deaths sometime in the nextdecade. 
It’s not obvious that we need any more surprising breakthroughs to get those billions of
deaths. If we just continue scaling based on present-day trends, the expected outcome of
that scaling is that sometime in the next several years, AI starts doing useful computer
science research, accelerates its own growth curve, and becomes more powerful than the
rest of humanity put together. 
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/LE7xFNwRRpZ8AJSAF
9/12

It’s possible that bottlenecks in data or electricity will slow this process somewhat, but
even a slowed-down process will still probably get us to superintelligence in the mid-
2030s. Any given constraint can and most likely will be eroded given adequate time and
financial incentives. If we “run out of electricity” for scaling in 2027, but scaling remains
profitable, then people will probably build more power plants. Those new power plants
won’t be ready immediately, but they won’t take decades to build, either.
If you’re a skeptic of scaling laws and you want to reject them in favor of taking the median
estimate of thousands of AI researchers, that still gives us a 50% chance of “unaided
machines outperforming humans in every possible task” by 2047, i.e., in 22 years. At a
minimum, that gets us widespread unemployment that makes the Great Depression look
like a hiccup; more plausibly, it leads to billions of deaths. If we don’t find a way to change
AI developers’ incentives before then, most of us are probably going to die young. 
The horse population peaked in 1915 because after that, humans and machines were better
than horses at every possible task; the 24 million horses we had then are down to only 6
million horses now. If we don’t successfully take action to prevent it, humans will suffer
the same catastrophic losses. That’s the path we’re on right now; that’s the status quo, and
that’s our default future.
This sequence will continue with a third post estimating our current ratio of researchers to
advocates and arguing that this ratio is very poorly optimized for getting policymakers to
change the status quo. The fourth post will argue that we cannot afford to further delay the
shift from research to advocacy, the fifth post will catalog the orphaned AI governance
ideas that are currently available and waiting for someone to flesh them out and advertise
them, and the sixth post will ask why our movement has been systematically
underfunding advocacy and offer suggestions about how to correct that problem.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/LE7xFNwRRpZ8AJSAF
10/12

Mentioned in
122
54
Next:
We're Not Advertising Enough
(Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance)
3 comments
54 karma
Previous:
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7
on AI Governance)
25 comments
141 karma
Log in to save where you left off
No comments on this post yet.
Be the first to respond.
Comments
More from Jason Green-Lowe
View more
Curated and popular this week
141
· 1y ago · 40m read
25
Jason Green-Lowe
63
· 11mo ago · 38m read
5
Jason Green-Lowe
53
· 10mo ago · 45m read
2
Jason Green-Lowe
The Center for AI Policy Has Shut Down
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance)
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance)
Shift Resources to Advocacy Now (Post 4 of 7 on AI Governance)
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance)
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/LE7xFNwRRpZ8AJSAF
11/12

Impact Requires Implementation: What Dispensers for Safe Water Scale-Back Can Teach
Us About Monitoring
 · 13d ago · 17m read  · 
3
The AI people have been right a lot
 · 4d ago · 7m read  · 
11
In Development Magazine Launch
 · 4d ago · 1m read  · 
4
Recent opportunities in AI safety
View more
Tony Senanayake
TL;DR Between 2022 and 2023, GiveWell and Open Philanthropy committed over $70 million to
Evidence Action’s Dispensers for Safe Water programme. An independent survey in 2025 found that in
Uganda and Malawi the programme was reaching approximately 70% fewer people with detectable…
Dylan Matthews
This post was crossposted from Dylan Matthew's blog by the EA Forum
team. The author may not see or reply to comments. ----------------------
------------------ Subtitle: Try to keep an open mind as the world gets…
Lauren Gilbert
We're announcing a new development magazine: In Development. Our goal is to promote discourse on
development without dogma. In other words, we public stories doing deep dives into pressing
development issues, backed up by evidence, argument, and experience. The first piece is by Paul…
80
· 11d ago · 8m read
4
Garrison
11
· 13h ago · 3m read
0
Tobias Häberli, Tilman, James Nicholas Bryant, Ariel
12
· 22d ago · 7m read
0
Sophie Kim
Help me launch Obsolete: a book aimed at building a new movement for …
Pivotal Research Fellowship applications are open (deadline May 3)
AI Can Already Evade DNA Synthesis Screening. Congress's New Bil…
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/LE7xFNwRRpZ8AJSAF
12/12
