AN ACTIVIST VIEW OF AI GOVERNANCE
AI safety
AI governance
Frontpage
In my previous post° in this series, I explained why we urgently need to change AI
developers’ incentives: if we allow the status quo to continue, then an AI developer will
recklessly deploy misaligned superintelligence, which is likely to permanently
disempower humanity and cause billions of deaths. AI governance research can potentially
be helpful in changing this status quo, but only if it’s paired with plenty of political
advertising – research by itself doesn’t automatically convince any of the people who have
the power to rein in AI developers.
Executive Summary
Here, in the third post, I want to make it clear that we are not doing nearly enough political
advertising to successfully change the status quo. By my estimate, we have at least 3
governance researchers for every governance advocate. This means that we are predictably
generating more good ideas than we can hope to share with decision-makers. This is an
unforced error on our part that we should correct.
A major reason why this 3:1 ratio is poorly suited to changing policymakers’ minds is that
you almost always want to have more staff working on a ‘central’ activity that can directly
achieve your goals than on a ‘supportive’ activity that only indirectly supports those goals.
This is mostly a matter of arithmetic: the benefit of an indirect support worker is
multiplied by the size of your central team, so if your central team is very small, then it’s
hard for support staff to do much good. You don’t need a full-time accountant to support a
one-person taco stand – even if they’re very good at accounting, and even if accurate
accounting is very important, a single taco stand just doesn’t offer enough scope for the
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on
AI Governance)
by Jason Green-Lowe
May 22 2025
54
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
Reject
Accept all
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
1/23

accountant’s talents to pay off. If you had three accountants for every taco truck, that
would be an even worse use of resources.
The directness or indirectness of work isn’t a binary variable – rather, it’s possible for
work to be one, two, or several layers removed from its ultimate goal. If your theory of
change relies on person A supporting person B, who will support person C, who will
support person D, then at each stage of that operation, the ‘inner’ team has to be large
enough relative to the ‘outer’ team in order to justify investing in a specialist – meaning
that the core team should be truly massive before you start investing in specialists who are
three or more levels removed.
Unfortunately, most of the research being done in the AI governance community today is
very abstract, and is several layers removed from the core goal of changing AI developers’
incentives. The research typically does not even comment on any particular law or
regulation – instead, most of the research tries to make general predictions about the
future or to weigh the pros and cons of various types of policies. This kind of academic
research could be useful to policy wonks who do offer constructive criticism about a
specific policy, which could in turn be useful to the people trying to draft better versions of
that policy, which could in turn be useful to the people selling and advertising that policy
on Capitol Hill – but the effects are very indirect and heavily diluted.
We could afford to support a few pure academic researchers despite this dilution if we had
many thousands of people working on oral advocacy – but by my estimate, there are less
than 60 full-time advocates working on AI governance in the US. As a result, I think we
should be looking to transition as many academic researchers as possible into advocacy
roles and help the rest of them re-focus their research on topics that will be of direct
relevance to advocacy.
There are 3 Researchers for Every Advocate
Methodology
To get my estimate that there are three researchers for every advocate, I looked at the
public websites of relevant organizations, with a little bit of help from LinkedIn. All of the
data I used to build my estimate is publicly available. If a person does not say on their
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
2/23

LinkedIn page or their website bio that they work on AI governance, then they’re not
included in the estimate. 
I have been working and networking in the US AI Governance field for the last three years
and I have been proactively trying to find out who else is in this field with me, so I expect
that my list of organizations is reasonably (although not perfectly) complete. 
I count anyone whose job title is “researcher,” “fellow,” “policy analyst,” or a similar variant
as a researcher, and I count anyone whose job title is “government relations associate,”
“communications director,” “engagement specialist,” etc., as an advocate. For managers,
directors, and other supervisors, I try to estimate how many of their staff are working as
either researchers or advocates; if necessary, I split their time and assume they are
working half-time as a researcher and half-time as an advocate. Similarly, I try to divide up
support staff, operations staff, and fundraising staff based on the relative proportion of
research and advocacy that the institution is engaged in. I do not count government
employees (because they are not supposed to be advocating for any particular policies), or
professors who are not explicitly affiliated with a research institute, policy institute, or
advocacy group (because they are presumably focused mostly on teaching and on purely
academic scholarship). I do count PhD students who describe themselves as employed full-
time in a particular research job, but I do not count other full-time students (because they
presumably are focused more on learning the fundamentals of their field than on
conducting original research or advocacy).
I do not count people working on technical AI alignment, because I am focused on AI
governance. Similarly, I do not count people working for institutions that are focused on
field-building, recruiting, fundraising, or organizing conferences – such work is valuable,
but it is not the focus of my argument in this blog post.
To determine whether a person works on “US” issues, I rely on where their institution is
based, unless their job title explicitly indicates otherwise. For example, the Future of Life
Institute’s primary address is in the United States, but I have excluded the FLI researchers
whose job title is “EU Fellow.” Similarly, the Future Society could be thought of as a
primarily European organization, but I have included a few of their researchers who clearly
focus on America, e.g., their Director of U.S. AI Governance. I suspect that this
methodology undercounts the actual ratio of researchers to advocates, because there is a
very large concentration of AI governance researchers in the UK who do work that would
seem to be highly applicable to US governance researchers. For example, GovAI employs 32
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
3/23

full-time equivalent (FTE) research positions, Apollo Research employs 20, and the Center
for Long-Term Risk employs 12. I am not aware of any similarly sized group of UK-based AI
governance advocates who lobby the US government.
To determine whether a person works on “AI Governance,” I have reviewed their website or
LinkedIn biographies and made a snap judgment. In some cases, I counted a person as
“half-time” because it appeared that they spent part of their time working on AI
Governance and part of their time working on other topics. Not everyone on the list would
identify as a ‘doomer’ or even as someone who “works on AI safety” – the list intentionally
includes people with a broad range of opinions and backgrounds. However, I have tried to
limit the list to only those people who appear (based on their published work and their
public bios) to support some type of proactive AI governance. I therefore do not include
people who appear to believe that decisions about AI should be left entirely to individual
private companies with no form of coordination (voluntary or otherwise), and I do not
include AI accelerationists.
In the interest of making a conservative estimate, I did not include any of Epoch AI’s 22
staff as either researchers or advocates. Although much of their research might wind up
cited in other AI governance work, and although their website shows that they received $6
million in funding from Open Philanthropy, it’s not obvious that their primary function is
to conduct AI governance research – most of their research aims to predict factual trends
about AI capabilities, rather than to analyze how those capabilities might best be governed.
I do not count the 10 people working for my own organization, the Center for AI Policy
(CAIP), because, as I have explained in the first post in this series, we have been denied
funding by most of AI safety’s institutional donors, and it is very likely that all of our staff
will soon need to find jobs in other fields.
Results
Using this methodology, I estimate that there are currently 202.5 full-time equivalent US
AI governance researchers, but only 55.75 full-time equivalent US AI governance advocates.
This is a ratio of approximately 3.6 researchers for every advocate. 
The results should be considered approximate; I am sure I have made some errors by
including and excluding some of the wrong people in each category, and I’m sure I have
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
4/23

entirely overlooked some people. I am confident that the true ratio (using my
methodology) is between 3 and 4 researchers per advocate. 
A Note on Privacy
Out of an abundance of caution, I have not actually included the list of the particular
advocates, researchers, and organizations in this public post. 
The reason I am not publishing the list is because many elements of the AI policy
community strongly value a certain kind of discretion or anonymity, for various reasons.
Some organizations or programs that appear to me to be focused on catastrophic risks
from AI take pains to maintain a public presentation as ‘mainstream’ or ‘establishment’
think tanks who cover a broad range of issues. Other organizations simply want to avoid
controversy or avoid being attacked by, e.g., Senator Ted Cruz.
I believe this effort to maintain a low profile is misguided. It seems to me that portraying
an AI safety organization as mainstream is likely to lead to bad results no matter whether
your portrayal succeeds or fails. If you successfully convince politicians that you are a
mainstream national security think tank that only incidentally covers AI policy, then those
politicians have no particular reason to call you for advice when there is an AI emergency
or an AI policy opportunity; you are likely to blend into the thousands of other policy
professionals in DC, most of which have better connections or better credentials. Likewise,
if you fail to convince politicians that you are a mainstream national security think tank,
then those politicians are very unlikely to call you for advice, because they have no reason
to trust you; they can see that you’re misrepresenting your organization, and that you’re
not even particularly skilled at deception. 
I don’t understand how blending into the background is supposed to help. In order to
spread ideas and convince others that those ideas have merit, you have to tell other people
about those ideas. If you communicate clearly enough for third parties to understand why
they should agree with you, then you will also communicate clearly enough for them to
figure out that you’re working on AI safety.
Moreover, I do not believe that sharing the list I used to create the estimate used here
would materially inconvenience those who prefer to protect their privacy. All of the
information in the list is publicly available, and there is no reason anyone else who is
interested could not easily replicate the list; it took me only a few hours to create.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
5/23

Nevertheless, the primary point I am trying to make is that the community should be
shifting resources from research to advocacy, and I am concerned that if I publish a list of
people working on AI governance, then the mere fact that the list was published will be a
serious distraction from my main point. Rather than fight two different battles, I will keep
the list semi-private.
If you have a particular concern about my methodology or results, and you need to see the
list in order to resolve that concern, please send me an email at jason@aipolicy.us. In that
email, please use your real name and explain what your question or objection is. If I do not
already know you, then please schedule a video call at https://calendly.com/jason-
aipolicy/15-minute-meeting so that we can establish trust. On a case-by-case basis, I will
consider sharing the list with specific people who have a legitimate reason to see it and
who I trust not to further distribute or publish the list.
A Note on Activist Researchers
Some people whose job title is “researcher” may also spend some time presenting their
findings to policymakers, and in that sense, they may be doing their own advocacy.
However, the impact of the advocacy conducted by researchers is diluted in several
different ways. 
First, and most obviously, part-time advocacy involves fewer hours per person. If 10
researchers all spend 10% of their time on advocacy, the benefit is probably no higher than
the benefit you’d get from 1 advocate working full-time on advocacy. 
Second, any part-time activity is typically less effective per hour than a full-time activity,
because if you’re only spending a few hours a week on something, then you don’t get as
much of a chance to improve your skills at it. If you’re a full-time advocate, you can
repeatedly practice your ‘elevator pitch’ for the most important pieces of legislation, you
can get feedback (from politicians’ facial expressions) about which versions of that pitch
are most effective, and you can refine your pitch based on what you learn. You’ll also just
get more comfortable with DC jargon and norms and fashion as you spend hundreds of
hours there, which will make you a more natural and therefore a more effective speaker. By
contrast, if you’re a part-time advocate, you only get to deliver a couple of sales pitches in
each political cycle, so you don’t have a chance to learn much about how to optimize your
pitch on a topic before DC moves on to the next topic.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
6/23

Similarly, if you work full-time, you can invest in resources that require economies of scale,
like BGov (an expensive service that gives you contact info for hundreds of Congressional
staffers, organized by committee), or Politico Pro (which gives you detailed insider gossip
about what’s happening in DC), or a physical office near Capitol Hill that signals to
lawmakers that you’re a serious player in the game. By contrast, if you’re only doing
advocacy part-time, you might be flying in from out of state for short periods and taking
whatever meetings you can get while recovering from jet lag.
The kind of people who are doing research 90% of the time probably don’t have a set of
talents and skills that are optimized for advocacy. Although anyone can learn to be a better
advocate, the best advocates are typically extroverts who enjoy making and maintaining
connections with lots of strangers and who can quickly and accurately figure out what
those people are feeling and how to capitalize on those feelings. These are not traits that
are commonly found among people who have chosen to do advanced intellectual research,
which typically requires many hours of quietly sitting alone and reading and writing.
Finally, I suspect at least some researchers are overestimating how much time they’re
spending on activities that have a meaningful impact on policy. Publishing a paper on your
organization’s website that includes recommendations for policymakers is typically not an
effective way of actually reaching those policymakers, especially if you don’t have any
statistics on how many times the paper is being downloaded or who is downloading it.
Submitting a response to a federal agency’s Request for Information is a little more
effective, because then at least you know that one of that agency’s staffers will have to
skim your paper for long enough to catalog it, but you’re still not guaranteed to reach
anyone who has any decision-making authority. Showing up at a policy conference that
includes some Congressional staffers or agency officials can be a good way to network, but
if you are not personally interacting with those officials at the conference, then the benefit
is limited.
If you’re working in research and you think your research is impacting policy makers, it’s
worth asking: which government officials have I personally talked to this month? Did they
say that they changed their mind about anything? Did they make any new promises to vote
for or co-sponsor or edit or introduce any laws or regulations? Did they say that they
would ask a question at a hearing, or send an official letter to an AI developer asking them
to defend their actions? If you haven’t talked to any government officials, or if you can’t
explain how those government officials will behave differently as a result of your
conversations, there’s a good chance that your advocacy isn’t very effective.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
7/23

I do not want to entirely dismiss the advocacy being done by researchers; I’m sure it has
some positive impact – but because it’s diluted in all these different ways, I don’t think it
substantially changes my point that we have more researchers than advocates. Even if we
make the somewhat generous assumptions that all 200 researchers are spending 10% of
their time on advocacy, and that their advocacy is half as effective per hour as the work
done by full-time professional advocates, that would add another 10 advocates to the pool,
and it would subtract 20 researchers from the pool, meaning the effective ratio would be
roughly 180 researchers to 65 advocates – still almost 3:1. 
Put the Largest Team on the Most Central
Problem
There is no good reason to have three times as many researchers as we do advocates. On
the contrary, we should have more advocates than researchers, because advocacy is a more
central problem than research in AI governance. The reason why advocacy is more central
is that (as I’ve been arguing throughout this sequence) AI governance isn’t a problem that
can be solved with better knowledge; we have to actually go and change AI developers’
incentives, or else we are probably going to die when the developers release misaligned
superintelligence. 
To the extent that academic research on AI governance steers the future at all, it does so by
making AI governance advocates more effective – and in that sense, the benefit of
academic research is indirect, not central.
Multiplier Effects and Staffing Ratios
The main reason why you want a relatively large group of people working on a central
problem and a relatively small group of people who are indirectly supporting that first
group is that the benefit of each indirect “support worker” is multiplied by the number of
direct “core workers” on your team. The larger your core team, the more good each support
worker does; the smaller your core team, the less good each support worker does.
To see why, suppose you have one year to build as many single-family homes as possible
on a 300 acre lot, and suppose you have a construction crew of 1,000 workers. In that
situation, it makes perfect sense to assign one of those workers to work full-time as a
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
8/23

surveyor, so that you can lay the buildings out neatly and make the most efficient possible
use of the land.
Alternatively, suppose your construction crew is only 2 workers: you and a friend. In that
situation, it’d be crazy to assign your friend to do full-time surveying, because your
limiting factor is not the land, it’s your time: you’ll be lucky to build even a couple of
houses in one year with just the two of you working, so you’d better focus on putting up
drywall and doors and windows and so on, even if that means your houses aren’t neatly
arranged in a perfect grid.
In both examples, surveying is a net positive activity – but it’s a thousand times less
effective in the second example, because there are a thousand times fewer carpenters to
benefit from it.
Adding more surveyors to the second example would not be expected to add more than a
tiny bit of marginal value. If you have one carpenter and five surveyors, the carpenter will
be able to work on an incredibly precise and accurate grid…but there’s still only one
carpenter and they just can’t swing their hammer enough times to put up more than a
couple of homes in one year, no matter how well-organized the grid is. In this situation, if
at all possible, you would want to reassign one of the surveyors to work as a carpenter,
even if they were a professional surveyor who was brilliant at their job and who didn’t
know much about carpentry. 
If they needed to spend six months learning carpentry before they knew enough to start
doing work on the doorframes, that would be a perfectly reasonable trade-off: their six
months working as the second carpenter will get more homes built than their twelve
months working as the sixth surveyor.
For similar reasons, if your goal is to distribute good music as widely as possible, you don’t
want one pianist with four piano tuners. If your goal is to rapidly respond to fires, you
don’t want one firefighter supported by ten telephone dispatchers. If your goal is to run a
successful restaurant, you don’t want two cooks supported by a team of thirty customer
service reps handing out customer satisfaction surveys. 
This is not to disparage the role of piano tuners or telephone dispatchers; obviously you
want someone to answer the phone when you call emergency services. In fact, if you had
zero telephone dispatchers, the firefighter might be useless, because they wouldn’t know
where to go. However, it would be very, very rare for you to need more dispatchers than
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
9/23

firefighters. It’s not about which job is more important; it’s about what staffing ratio
makes sense given the marginal gains from adding an additional person in each role. 
The marginal gains from adding another core worker are almost always moderate; they
scale approximately linearly until you saturate the field. If you have 500 carpenters, you
can build houses in a large neighborhood about five times as fast as if you had only 100
carpenters. 
By contrast, the marginal gains from adding another person who makes core workers
more efficient vary quite a lot depending on staffing ratios. The marginal value of adding
another support worker is very high when the core team is large relative to the support
team, and very low when the core team is small relative to the support team. If you have
100 carpenters and 0 surveyors, adding your first surveyor adds lots of marginal value. If
you have 10 carpenters and 10 surveyors, adding an 11  surveyor adds very little marginal
value.
Whichever activity is closest to your core goal almost always needs to have more people
working in it than the activities that support that goal by making it more efficient, because
otherwise the arithmetic starts working against you. It mostly doesn’t matter how
efficient the core activity is if barely anyone is performing that core activity.
How Many Levels Removed Are You?
The problem of indirect support teams needing to be small relative to the core teams
they’re supporting grows even more acute when there are multiple layers of separation
between the support team and the ultimate goal.
Marathons and S’mores
To see what I mean by “multiple layers of separation,” consider someone whose ultimate
goal is to run a marathon. A level 0 activity for this person might be going on a training
run – the training run directly contributes to your ability to run the marathon, so it’s zero
levels removed. Buying sneakers is a level 1 activity for this goal – it’s one level removed
from your goal of running the marathon. With a better pair of sneakers, you can train
harder with less risk of injury, but sneaker-shopping is only useful if you actually go and
use the sneakers to help you train. A level 2 activity is reading online reviews of sneaker
quality – if you know more about which sneakers are best, you can buy a better pair – but
th
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
10/23

this is only useful if you use what you learn to buy the best sneakers, and then use those
sneakers to go on harder training runs. A level 3 activity is installing a new web browser
that loads reviews faster – with a better browser, you can learn about the best sneakers
more efficiently, but this is only useful if you actually use the browser to read several
reviews, which is only useful if you then go out and buy the best sneakers, which is only
useful if you then go on harder training runs. A level 4 activity is teaching yourself HTML
– if you learn more about how browsers work, you’ll be able to do a better job of selecting
the best browser, which will let you load reviews faster, which will let you pick out better
sneakers, which will let you go on harder training runs, which will help you run the
marathon.
Hopefully it seems obvious that learning HTML is a terrible way of preparing to run a
marathon – if your actual goal is to finish the marathon, then you would be much better
off skipping the HTML lessons and reallocating that time to jogging practice or stretching
or even just getting more sleep. Because learning HTML is so many layers removed from
your actual goal, it’s not an efficient way of accomplishing that goal. 
Even if you were the coach of a large high school track team, you probably still wouldn’t
assign even one student to spend every practice learning HTML. The multiplier effect of
learning HTML is so small (because it’s so far removed from the core activity of running)
that you would need to be able to reap that effect across hundreds of thousands of runners
before that kind of specialization started to make sense. If you have fewer people than that,
you would want to do things that are more closely tied to the core activity. 
Similarly, if your ultimate goal is to roast some s’mores, the level 0 activity could be
lighting a fire. To prepare to light the fire, you might perform the level 1 activity of
gathering firewood. To help you gather firewood more efficiently, you might perform the
level 2 activity of sharpening the axe that you use to chop wood. To help you sharpen the
axe more efficiently, you might perform the level 3 activity of talking to friends and
discussing which blade-sharpening techniques work best. However, if most of your friends
aren’t interested in this topic, then you might perform the level 4 activity of travelling to a
blade-sharpening convention so that you can meet more people who like to talk about
blade-sharpening.
Again, hopefully it seems obvious that going to a blade-sharpening convention isn’t a good
way of roasting s’mores – the hours it would take you to travel to and from the convention
far outweigh the seconds you might hope to gain by sharpening your axe more efficiently,
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
11/23

and in any case you can probably just buy some firewood at your local hardware store for
less money than it would cost to go to the convention. Meeting blade-sharpening experts
is so far removed from the core task of roasting marshmallows that it’s not a reasonable
way of pursuing that goal.
These are silly examples, but as I’ll show in the rest of this subsection, they follow
approximately the same structure as what we’re doing right now in AI governance. Writing
an academic paper about AI governance is about as far removed from the task of changing
Sam Altman’s incentives as learning HTML is from running a marathon. It’s not that the
paper can’t be helpful – it’s that the help is so far removed from the core activity of fixing
AI developers’ incentives that it would have to be spread across thousands of advocates
before it was more cost-effective than just directly working on advocacy – and because we
don’t have thousands of advocates, we’d be better off focusing most of our efforts on
lower-level tasks.
0 Levels Removed: Government. 
The “level 0” task for AI governance mostly happens inside the government. For example,
passing a law that penalizes reckless developers is zero levels removed – it directly
changes AI developers’ incentives. The people who can do level 0 work include legislators,
regulators, judges, prosecutors, and police. To the extent that AI developers need insurance
or private accreditation, this group might also include insurers and auditors. Similarly, if
there are strong enough norms in place about following industry standards, then the
people who sit on a committee that writes industrial standards (e.g., at IEEE, or at NIST)
might also belong in this group.
Right now, almost no level 0 work is happening, because there are very few laws that
require any particular behavior from AI developers. The closest recent example I can think
of is Congress’s passage of the Take It Down Act, although this deals only with one
particular harm from AI, and not with existential risks.
1 Level Removed: Politics. 
Activists and advocates who are trying to convince the government to change the rules
about how to develop AI are doing “level 1” work; they are one level removed from the task
of giving AI executives a better set of incentives. The vast majority of activism doesn’t
directly change AI companies’ incentives; Sam Altman probably doesn’t care very much
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
12/23

how many people are protesting outside his sound-proofed office. However, protestors can
sometimes convince legislators to write new laws, which would change Sam Altman’s
incentives.
Examples of level 1 work include sending your Congressperson questions to ask at a
hearing, meeting with agency officials, giving press conferences, writing open letters,
filing litigation, campaigning for Senator Hawley or against Senator Cruz, and organizing
boycotts. Right now there is not much level 1 work happening, because the AI safety
movement employs very few professional advocates. One recent example that does qualify
as level 1 work is the letter to the California Attorney General urging him to block OpenAI’s
conversion to a for-profit company. The letter prominently features a specific request for a
specific politician to take a specific action, which, if agreed to, would immediately change
an AI developer’s incentives.
This is the kind of work that I would like most of the AI governance community to be
doing.
2 Levels Removed: Drafting. 
Policy wonks who are drafting specific, concrete policies for the activists to promote are
doing “level 2” work, in the sense that this work is two levels removed from changing the
incentives of AI laboratories. This could include writing laws, writing regulations, writing
treaties, writing contracts, writing industry standards, or writing corporate governance
documents. By itself, writing up the text of model legislation doesn’t do anything to
change Meta’s incentives, but it’s possible that a political advocate will be able to use that
model legislation to make a more effective pitch to a Congressperson, who will in turn be
more motivated to try to pass a law that would change Meta’s incentives. I’ll cover specific
examples of the documents that need to be written in post 5 of this sequence.
Other activities that belong in this category include opposition research, polling, and legal
surveys. To do their jobs effectively, advocates may want juicy gossip about the
weaknesses of their political opponents, so that those opponents are easier to discredit. For
example, if you can show that a supposedly independent medical clinic is actually funded
by the tobacco industry, then politicians will be less likely to believe that clinic when it
publishes studies purporting to show that, e.g., cigarettes are perfectly healthy. Similarly, if
you have a poll showing that a large majority of experts or of the American public all
support a particular policy, then it’s easier to get Congresspeople to support that policy. 
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
13/23

Finally, if, as an advocate, you know what other key players are doing in your field, then it’s
easier for you to convince lawmakers to trust you and to follow your advice, because you
seem well-informed about things that politicians care about. A modest amount of
background research on, e.g., what state legislatures are doing on AI governance, or what
federal agencies are doing on AI governance, can enhance advocates’ persuasive power,
and is therefore only two levels removed from the core task of changing AI companies’
incentives. A good example of this kind of legal survey is Convergence Analysis’s 2024
State of the AI Regulatory Landscape.
It makes sense for a portion of the AI governance community to do this kind of work –
10%, or 20%, or something along those lines. We don’t need as many drafters as we do
advocates, but the drafters are still valuable.
3 Levels Removed: Commentary. 
Any document that’s offering any kind of commentary on someone else’s policy proposal
is at best “level 3” work. This includes papers that offer constructive criticism about an
existing idea, that evaluate the likely impact of one or more policy proposals, and that
muster arguments for or against a particular policy proposal. If you’re arguing about how
many FLOPs a threshold should be set at, that’s three levels removed from the core work of
changing AI companies’ incentives. This work can only be effective if there’s already a
reasonably well-drafted concrete policy proposal in play, which is already being promoted
by reasonably competent advocates, who are already being listened to by reasonably
powerful politicians. If any of those steps are missing, then the commentary has no
measurable impact on the real world.
Similarly, if the main contribution of a document is to suggest a new policy idea that
someone else might someday want to flesh out into a concrete policy proposal, then that’s
three levels removed from the core task of influencing AI companies’ incentives. Until
someone actually goes and does the work of drafting up that policy proposal into
something reasonably concrete, it doesn’t have any impact at all on which models
DeepMind will deploy. 
For example, inventing the idea of “compute monitoring” or explaining why compute
monitoring would be good policy is level 3 work. It’s potentially helpful if someone else
goes and drafts a bill that implements compute monitoring, and then someone else shows
that bill to politicians, and then those politicians are convinced that it’s worthwhile and
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
14/23

pass it into law. However, if nobody ever writes up a sample compute monitoring bill, or at
least fleshes the idea out enough to show how precisely how it could work, then compute
monitoring remains stuck at the idea stage. Politicians are too busy to take an abstract idea
and turn it into a law all by themselves. If nobody does that work for them, then nobody
will actually go and monitor Amazon’s chips, and Amazon will remain free to rent or sell
their compute to anyone who can pay, even if compute monitoring is a brilliant idea with a
mountain of evidence behind it.
If there are only 60 AI governance advocates, it’s not obvious that any of them should be
working full-time on creating this kind of commentary – whatever marginal gains can be
had from improving the quality of theoretical policies (which might get drafted someday)
are heavily outweighed by the need to go and actually draft any policies at all (right now)
and then show those drafts to decision-makers (next month). I expect this point will seem
more compelling after you read post 5 in this sequence, which catalogs all of the
‘orphaned’ policy ideas that have been sitting on arXiv for years, patiently waiting for
someone to bring them to Capitol Hill for the first time.
Another reason not to stress over making marginal improvements to as-yet-undrafted
policies is that whether any given policy gets passed has more to do with the news cycle
and the force of the advocacy behind it than the exact quality of the policy. This is
sometimes called the “multiple streams framework” or just “waiting for the policy window
to open.” If you have a strong political coalition supporting a mediocre policy during a
month when the news won’t stop talking about your issue, the mediocre policy is pretty
likely to pass; if you have a mediocre political coalition supporting an excellent policy
during a month when the news is ignoring you, the excellent policy is very likely to fail. If
this doesn’t seem obviously true, it might be worth reflecting on all of the mediocre
policies that have already become law. How do you suppose they got passed?
Because of these dynamics, we’re much more likely to succeed by taking a higher number
of reasonable shots on goal than by trying to take one perfect shot. Besides, the quality of
even our roughest policies is still much better than the policies we’ll get under the status
quo. Unless and until we get something done in government, the default policy is that
companies keep recklessly developing and scaling unsafe models until one of them kills
us. Compared to the status quo, almost any AI governance policy would be a major
improvement.
4 Levels Removed: Theorizing. 
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
15/23

Many of the documents being created by AI governance researchers are still yet further
removed from the core task of altering AI developers’ incentives. They don’t offer any
significant new commentary on any particular policy proposal – instead, they consider
abstract or academic policy questions, or they seek to categorize or organize existing
material.
For example, “Considerations for Governing Open Foundation Models” is not advocating
on behalf of any particular policy tool for coping with open source models, nor is it directly
making suggestions about how to improve a policy on open source models. Instead, it
catalogs some of the risks and benefits of open source models. This could be indirectly
useful if, e.g., someone were trying to offer constructive criticism about an open source
policy proposal and they weren’t sure what categories or concepts they should be
referencing – but if nobody is writing that particular piece of constructive criticism, or if
the underlying open source policy proposal hasn’t yet been fleshed out, or if no advocate is
presenting that proposal to politicians, or if the politicians don’t vote the proposal into law,
then this research does not have the power to steer us into a different future.
Similarly, “An Overview of Catastrophic AI Risks” is not primarily aimed at supporting any
particular policy proposal. Instead, the paper says that its “goal is to foster a
comprehensive understanding of these risks and inspire collective and proactive efforts to
ensure that AIs are developed and deployed in a safe manner.” Most of the 55-page paper
discusses how AI development could cause harm, with only about 6 pages going toward
“suggestions” about how to respond to these risks. Because these suggestions cover
several different policy ideas for each of four different types of risks, it is difficult for these
suggestions to cover new ground or go into substantive detail. For instance, the suggestion
on “legal liability for developers of general-purpose AIs” does not endorse any particular
liability regime. Likewise, the suggestion about “adversarially robust anomaly detection”
notes that “AIs could enable anomaly detection techniques that could be used for the
detection of unusual behavior,” but does not say anything about how to measure the
effectiveness of such techniques or how to hold AI developers accountable for
implementing such techniques. 
As a result, the paper is what it claims to be: an overview. Policy wonks might find the
overview helpful as they try to think of new kinds of policy proposals, which in turn might
help legislative drafters write up stronger model legislation, which in turn might help
political advocates make a stronger case for AI governance to politicians, who in turn
might be more motivated to pass AI safety laws – but because we have so few advocates,
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
16/23

it’s very likely that this chain of cause and effect will break somewhere in the middle. Even
if the chain holds, the research probably won’t drive a significant amount of policy change,
because it’s not obvious how any particular advocate is supposed to use this research. The
overview is too long to be of interest to most policymakers, yet too vague to contain
concrete new policies.
Another type of research paper tries to estimate a particular fact or make a specific
prediction about the future, even if this prediction does not directly bear on any particular
policy. For example, Daron Acemoglu’s research predicts that AI technologies will increase
total factor productivity by about 0.66% over the next 10 years. It’s not immediately
obvious how (if at all) this finding connects to any particular AI governance effort.
Professor Acemoglu suggests that economic results will be better if “AI is used for
generating new tasks for workers,” but it is not clear who could ensure that this happens or
how they would do so. As a result, his research is at least four levels removed from the core
task of changing AI developers’ incentives.
Some academic research tries to make qualitative predictions, rather than quantitative
predictions. Earlier this month, RAND published the 73-page paper “On the Extinction
Risk from Artificial Intelligence.” The goal of this paper is not to pin down any particular
fact or statistic, but rather to “see if we can describe a scenario in which plausible
extrapolations from current circumstances could lead to an outcome that meets our
definition of an extinction threat.” The paper considers AI-related threats from nuclear
war, bioweapons, and geoengineering, and eventually determines that “an extinction
threat is at least possible” from each of these types of threats, but that AI would have to
overcome significant barriers to literally trigger human extinction. 
The paper concludes by recommending several avenues for further research, including
research into cybersecurity, research aimed at identifying relevant “risk indicators,”
research into new types of threats, and research aimed at identifying “decision triggers.”
Although the paper briefly suggests that humanity should improve its general resilience
by, e.g., reducing nuclear weapons stockpiles and preparing for future pandemics, the
paper does not say who specifically should pursue these goals or how they should
accomplish them. It is not clear that the paper is even attempting to recommend that any
government, company, or trade group should take any particular action. As a result, this
paper appears to be at least four levels removed from the task of changing AI developers’
incentives.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
17/23

One way of interpreting the RAND paper is as a call for national security experts to pay
more attention to existential risks from AI. On this theory, the point of the paper is not to
immediately advocate for any particular policy change, but rather to shift politically
valuable experts into ‘our’ camp, so that future policy changes will be easier. 
There are two problems with this theory. First, the paper seems to be aimed primarily at
national security researchers, rather than national security policymakers. The ‘action item’
mentioned most often in the paper is the need for more research to be done on particular
topics. There are no specific recommendations made in the paper that Marco Rubio or
Steven Miller or Dan Caine could reasonably act on. Second, if the paper is meant as a
recruiting tool, then it’s not obvious why it wouldn’t be more efficient to directly lay out
arguments why national security experts should start working on existential risk from AI. 
It’s possible that there’s some kind of 5-D chess game being played here where offering an
academic discussion of AI problems will subtly attract national security policymakers in
ways that are not apparent to me as someone who’s only spent three years in DC. I don’t
object to having some experts play some 5-D chess…but I believe that in addition to the 5-
D chess, we should also be trying the direct strategy of clearly explaining what we want
and why we want it. That direct strategy seems to be woefully underemployed. If our
intermediate goal is to recruit more national security policymakers, then I would like to
see someone publish a paper with a title like “Why National Security Experts Should
Address Existential Risks from AI.”
As one final example of “level 4” research, consider the paper “Who Should Develop Which
AI Evaluations?” The paper discusses four different methods that could be used to develop
AI evaluations, suggests some of the advantages and disadvantages of each method, and
then uses this analysis to propose criteria that could be used to determine which method to
use for particular types of evaluations. The categories developed in the paper are quite
reasonable, but the paper is almost entirely disconnected from any concrete
recommendations. It does not say which politicians should act, or when, or what they
should do. If AI developers choose to use whichever evaluations are best for their
marketing, rather than use the evaluations that are best for public safety, how would the
authors respond? It’s not clear. The connection between this paper and the success of any
particular advocacy campaign is, at best, very thin. This is typical of most of the AI
governance research that I’ve seen in the last few years.
What Kind of Research Helps Advocates?
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
18/23

All of the examples I’ve cited here are, in my opinion, excellent academic research. For
example, Professor Acemoglu’s research won a Nobel Prize. My purpose in citing these
examples is not to criticize them as academic research, but rather to point out that even the
best academic research is unlikely to have much marginal impact on AI developers’
incentives. Just because a paper has “extinction risk” in the title doesn’t mean that
publishing the paper will reduce extinction risks. There’s not much correlation between
how academically important a paper is and how useful that paper is to advocates.
This can be difficult to accept, especially if you or your friends are currently working on AI
governance research. It's tempting to generate reasons why research is valuable even if it
doesn’t straightforwardly lead to better laws. Perhaps research can add to the credibility of
the AI safety movement as a whole, or perhaps research is a good way to make valuable
connections with other experts, or perhaps research will help us identify the best possible
policies so that if we (somehow) acquire some political power in the future, we’ll be able to
use that power as effectively as possible.
I don’t actually disagree with any of these suggestions – I just think they’re not intense
enough to outweigh the benefit of having another advocate out there knocking on doors
and directly telling politicians about existential risk. 
We really need everyone we can get to spread the word in DC. I have been shocked and
humbled to see how many Congressional offices were simply unaware of basic facts about
AI safety. In December 2024, I met with at least five offices – including some on the
Judiciary Committee – who were very surprised to hear that AI developers aren’t covered
by existing whistleblower laws. In February 2025, we met with a Representative who didn’t
know that large language models aren’t naturally human-interpretable. In April 2025, I met
with a district office director who asked me for informational materials to help explain
what a data center is. If we don’t send people to DC to personally tell politicians why
misaligned superintelligence is dangerous, then most of them won’t ever understand. 
We don’t need to do advanced research to cure this basic ignorance: we just need to talk to
people, preferably over coffee. There is so much low-hanging fruit on the ground. I’m
begging you to help me pick it up. I think many of the people who have been working in
academic research could and should learn how to become effective advocates – even today,
there are very few people who clearly understand the risks from misaligned
superintelligence, and that’s an understanding that’s absolutely necessary to successfully
advocate for better AI governance.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
19/23

For researchers who can’t or won’t work directly as advocates, I strongly urge you to find a
way to refocus your next paper on something that’s fewer levels removed from the core
task of changing AI developers’ incentives. If you’ve been writing level 4 theory papers,
consider writing a level 3 commentary on a specific policy instead. If you’ve been writing
level 3 commentary, consider actually drafting a level 2 example of a policy and including
that draft as part of what you publish. 
After you publish a paper that took you four weeks of work to write, I challenge you to take
5% of that time – 8 hours by the clock – and spend it trying to get that paper into the hands of
someone with some decision-making authority. If you don’t know anyone with decision-
making authority, spend the time calling or emailing your colleagues and seeing if they
can introduce you. If your colleagues don’t know any decision-makers either, then spend
the time going to a conference or a meetup and keep meeting more people until you do
know someone who can change a policy.
In the next post in this sequence, I’ll talk about why now is the right time to shift resources
from research to advocacy. A decade ago, we were absolutely right to be focused on
research, because you need abstract research to found a new field. Now that the field of AI
governance has been reasonably well-established, though, we need to work in that field,
which means we need to put down some of our pencils and pick up some telephones. I will
examine various reasons for further delaying that shift and show why none of them are
defensible.
Mentioned in
122
Next:
Shift Resources to Advocacy Now
(Post 4 of 7 on AI Governance)
5 comments
63 karma
Previous:
The Need for Political Advertising
(Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance)
No comments
61 karma
Log in to save where you left off
The Center for AI Policy Has Shut Down
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
20/23

59
Comments 3
Sorted by New & upvoted
Marcus Abramovitch 🔸
1
0
12
This is a great post. Way too many people in EA want to be able to do remote work behind a computer
and not get into the thick of things that actually change things. I agree with your marathons and
smores analogy; I don't think I agree specifically with what you called the Levels for AI work but I
digress since I like the main message. 
Too often, I think people make the mistake that if they are working up the stack, they are getting a lot
of leverage but we need 10x the amount of people at the lower trophic levels and without those, you
don't have any leverage at all. There are few exceptions to this of course, like MATS who produce a
bunch of AI safety researchers but that's directly increasing the number of "level 0" people.
Jason Green-Lowe
0
0
1
Yes, that's a great insight! People assume that if they're high up the stack, then they must have a lot
of leverage -- and this can be true, sometimes. If you are the first person to run a study on which
curable diseases are neglected, and there are a million doctors and nurses and epidemiologists who
could benefit from the results of that study, your leverage is enormous.
However, it's not always true. If you're the 200th person to run a study on the risks of AI, but there
are only 60 AI advocates who can benefit from the results of that study, then your leverage is weak.
I don't want to insist on any particular number of levels for any particular kind of work -- the key
point is that on average, AI governance is way too high up the stack given our current staffing ratios.
Jonathan Jacqueminet
0
0
2
I agree with these arguments. Though part of me feels like research (both practical policy research
and abstract research) is still very important because it seems we don't actually have sufficiently
good answers just yet. 
Obviously, the shorter your timelines, the more freestyle muddling through based on uncertainty
about good solutions seems optimal.
For me, this post also goes hand in hand with this post by Soares about being honest in your belief
about AI risks.
Career Advice for Policy Researchers
11mo
11mo
9mo
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
21/23

More from Jason Green-Lowe
View more
Curated and popular this week
Impact Requires Implementation: What Dispensers for Safe Water Scale-Back Can Teach
Us About Monitoring
 · 13d ago · 17m read  · 
3
The AI people have been right a lot
 · 4d ago · 7m read  · 
11
In Development Magazine Launch
 · 4d ago · 1m read  · 
4
141
· 1y ago · 40m read
25
Jason Green-Lowe
63
· 11mo ago · 38m read
5
Jason Green-Lowe
61
· 1y ago · 16m read
0
Jason Green-Lowe
Tony Senanayake
TL;DR Between 2022 and 2023, GiveWell and Open Philanthropy committed over $70 million to
Evidence Action’s Dispensers for Safe Water programme. An independent survey in 2025 found that in
Uganda and Malawi the programme was reaching approximately 70% fewer people with detectable…
Dylan Matthews
This post was crossposted from Dylan Matthew's blog by the EA Forum
team. The author may not see or reply to comments. ----------------------
------------------ Subtitle: Try to keep an open mind as the world gets…
Lauren Gilbert
We're announcing a new development magazine: In Development. Our goal is to promote discourse on
development without dogma. In other words, we public stories doing deep dives into pressing
development issues, backed up by evidence, argument, and experience. The first piece is by Paul…
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance)
Shift Resources to Advocacy Now (Post 4 of 7 on AI Governance)
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance)
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
22/23

Recent opportunities in AI safety
View more
11
· 13h ago · 3m read
0
Tobias Häberli, Tilman, James Nicholas Bryant, Ariel
150
· 7d ago · 7m read
9
Topaz, Agustín Covarrubias 🔸, Alexandra Bates + 2 more
148
· 8d ago · 9m read
16
Sophie Kim
Pivotal Research Fellowship applications are open (deadline May 3)
AI Safety's Biggest Talent Gap Isn't Researchers. It's Generalists.
The Anthropic IPO Is Coming. We Aren't Ready for It.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
We're Not Advertising Enough (Post 3 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/ZLDcoLzxLGtcBD6ok
23/23
