AN ACTIVIST VIEW OF AI GOVERNANCE
AI safety
Opportunities to take action
Policy
AI governance
Announcements and updates
Funding request (open)
Opinion
Organization updates
US policy
Frontpage
Show all topics
I am Jason Green-Lowe, the executive director of the Center for AI Policy (CAIP). Our
mission is to directly convince Congress to pass strong AI safety legislation. As I explain in
some detail in this post, I think our organization has been doing extremely important
work, and that we’ve been doing well at it. Unfortunately, we have been unable to get
funding from traditional donors to continue our operations. If we don’t get more funding
in the next 30 days, we will have to shut down, which will damage our relationships with
Congress and make it harder for future advocates to get traction on AI governance. In this
post, I explain what we’ve been doing, why I think it’s valuable, and how your donations
could help. 
This is the first post in what I expect will be a 6-part series. The first post focuses on
CAIP’s particular need for funding. The next few posts will lay out a more general case for
why effective altruists and others who worry about AI safety should spend more money on
advocacy and less money on research – even if you don’t think my organization in
particular deserves any more funding, you might be convinced that it’s a priority to make
sure other advocates get more funding. The final post will take a look at some institutional
problems that might be part of why our movement has been systematically underfunding
advocacy and offer suggestions about how to correct those problems.
OUR MISSION AND STRATEGY
The Center for AI Policy’s mission is to directly and openly urge the US Congress to pass
strong AI safety legislation. By “strong AI safety legislation,” we mean laws that will
significantly change AI developers’ incentives and make them less likely to develop or
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI
Governance)
by Jason Green-Lowe
May 7 2025
141
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
Reject
Accept all
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
1/35

deploy extremely dangerous AI models. The particular dangers we are most worried about
are (a) bioweapons, (b) intelligence explosions, and (c) gradual disempowerment. Most AI
models do not significantly increase these risks, and so we advocate for narrowly-targeted
laws that would focus their attention on only the most advanced general-purpose AI
systems and chips.
We focus on Congress because Congress is the only institution that's both powerful
enough to reliably override the desires of multi-billion dollar corporations, and whose
decisions are durable enough that a victory today will still be relevant during the critical
time period. A President's executive order can easily be canceled as soon as the next
President takes office; this is what happened to President Biden's 10/30/23 Executive Order
on AI. Likewise, a court case or a state legislature can be overruled, but Congress very
rarely repeals its own laws. For a more detailed defense of our choice to focus on Congress,
please see Questions 3, 4, and 5 in "Responses to Common Policy Objections."
Our Model Legislation
The primary legislative tool that we recommend for coping with the catastrophic risks
posed by advanced AI is mandatory private audits backed up by a small new government
office that has special powers to proactively recruit the tech talent needed to assess
whether these audits are accurate and complete, and to block the deployment of a new AI
system whenever they are not satisfied by an audit. Other policy tools that we recommend
in our model legislation include civil liability reform, hardware monitoring, a suite of
carefully limited emergency powers, and an ‘analysis’ office that investigates and tracks
trends in AI hardware and software and uses what they learn to advise the rest of the
government on AI-related decisions. 
We think that if our model legislation was passed, then many of the flaws in AI models
that would otherwise be most likely to cause accidental catastrophic harm in the next few
years would instead be detected and corrected. These policy tools can't guarantee safety or
permanently prevent developers from deploying superintelligence, but they're likely to
pick up a lot of the low-hanging fruit around reducing the harms from near-term,
accidental, and/or half-baked deployments. For a detailed defense of why these policies are
worth pursuing, please see the sections on "Our Proposed Policies" and "Responses to
Common Policy Objections," below.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
2/35

Direct Meetings with Congressional Staffers
In order to carry out our mission, we pursue a variety of complementary strategies for
securing the attention of relevant Congressional staffers and persuading them to take
action. The most obvious and direct of these strategies is simply meeting, in-person, with
staffers who work in key offices or who serve on key committees. We have 30-minute
meetings about once a quarter with most of the people who are responsible for AI policy in
the House and the Senate; this gives us a chance to make sure they understand our
concerns about the catastrophic risks from AI, that they know who else is working on this
problem, and that we can introduce them to other people worth knowing, such as technical
experts on AI safety, companies that support AI safety, and constituents from their home
districts who support AI safety. It has been humbling and startling to see how many
staffers had simply never heard that AI could pose catastrophic risks to public safety, or
who had never heard the arguments in favor of this position explained calmly and simply
enough for them to want to consider them. 
Expert Panel Briefings
In addition to direct meetings, we also host expert panels on topics that are at the
intersection of AI and of topics that are already of interest to Congressional staffers, e.g., AI
and music, or AI and education, or AI and national security. We bring in speakers with
prestigious credentials and a range of views on the topic at hand, which often leads to
lively debate, and which inevitably showcases the growing importance of AI and the gaps
in existing AI governance that require a policy solution. The primary purpose of these
briefings is to put us in touch with new staffers who would otherwise not know about our
organization, but we also find that these panels are a useful tool for educating staffers
about the risks posed by AI. Even when these risks are not the primary subject of the
discussion, paying close attention to any aspect of AI typically reveals some of its more
threatening risks. 
AI Policy Happy Hours
Another way we connect with new staffers who we would not otherwise meet is by hosting
happy hours for AI staffers, AI researchers, and other AI policymakers, where all of these
people can mingle in a relaxed environment. Again, in addition to helping us connect with
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
3/35

new stakeholders, we find that this also gives us an opportunity to educate staffers about
why unregulated AI is so concerning. 
Op-Eds & Policy Papers
For similar reasons, we often publish op-eds, letters to the editor, research papers, and
policy papers about AI governance – we find that these papers attract positive attention
from our target audience of Congressional staffers and encourage them to take our
concerns more seriously. Some staffers will directly change their minds as a result of
reading articles or quotes that we publish, but more importantly, if staffers have read about
us in the news, then they are more likely to see our policy proposals as credible and
important and therefore to accept a meeting request with us and come to that meeting
with an open mind.
Grassroots & Grasstops Organizing
Finally, we have some grassroots and 'grasstops' organizing projects. At the grassroots
level, we are gathering volunteers from student AI safety groups across the country or
from particular industries or trade associations to come to DC and share their concerns
directly with their elected representatives. Our experience is that hearing from their own
constituents motivates Congressional offices to pay attention to our message while also
building up a base of nationwide political support that can be tapped for future initiatives.
A single university AI safety group can come off as idealistic and perhaps naive; a coalition
of 20 AI safety groups all working together have a more credible claim to represent
"America's future" and are harder to dismiss.
We also get a wide variety of benefits from our grasstops organizing, which mostly
involves building relationships with important stakeholders in industry, the open source
movement, academia, AI ethics advocates, IP rightsholders like the RIAA, and so on.
Sometimes we find common ground with some of these groups and sign each others' open
letters, speak at each other's events, and so on. Even when we don't agree, the fact that
we're part of an ongoing conversation with other advocates both improves our policies (by
giving them a chance to point out Pareto-superior trade-offs) and sends a costly signal
that we've carefully considered our ideas and that we know what other political actors
think about our ideas. Most Congressional offices only want to support a bill if they think
it has a good chance of passing, which in turn can depend on who supports or opposes it,
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
4/35

so one of the most common questions we get in our meetings is "What does group X think
about your policy?" Being able to give concrete and accurate answers to these questions
demonstrates that we're a reasonably savvy partner who is worth doing business with.
What's Unique About CAIP?
To the best of our knowledge, CAIP is the only organization that combines:
A 501(c)(4) tax status, which lets us directly advocate for particular laws and
candidates;
A focus on Congress as the institution whose minds need to be changed;
A public push for mandatory safety policies that would apply to all American AI
developers; and
A grassroots network that gives us a credible claim to be representing the public.
We see these features as synergistic -- if you can't tell Congress exactly what you'd like
them to do, there's a good chance they won't know what you want of them. If you're not
talking to Congress, then, as discussed in Question 3 in "Responses to Common Policy
Objections," there's a good chance that your advocacy will be overridden. And if you can't
tell Congress who you're supposed to be representing, then there's a good chance that
they'll ignore you. Congress isn't set up to make decisions purely based on an analysis of
which policies would be optimal; they want to pass laws that will be both good public
policy and politically popular. I'll discuss this point in more detail in the second blog post
in this series.
OUR ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Quantifiable Outputs
For a relatively new organization, CAIP has already had some impressive
accomplishments. In terms of outputs, we’ve had 406 Congressional meetings, hosted 20
events, and been featured in 46 pieces of earned media (i.e., in mainstream publications
like Politico, Time Magazine, and FOX News where they quote us because they see us as
relevant to their story). We’ve also published 122 blog posts, 70 weekly newsletters sent to
over 2,000 followers, 16 podcast episodes, 14 research papers, and 13 administrative filings.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
5/35

For context, we are under two years old. We have never had more than ten full-time
employees, and we had five or fewer full-time employees for most of our first year.
Changing the Media Narrative
Our impact on the media has been more important than the numbers alone would suggest,
because we’ve been able to shift the public narrative about AI safety from suspicion and
doubt to earnest support. Instead of being depicted as a naive or corrupt pet
project sponsored by billionaires with vested interests, we are now being cast as the heroes
who are looking out for the public interest. The content of media pieces about AI safety
advocacy has shifted from an unhealthy interest in our movement's funding sources to a
more direct and productive discussion of our policy proposals. 
This is the result of an intentional effort on our part -- we've been steadily building
relationships with key journalists so that they know, respect, and trust us, and so that they
see us as people who are trying to help, rather than just shadowy figures lurking in the
background. We also provide facts, introductions, and context for journalists even when
we're not being directly quoted in an article. Good media coverage isn't (just) a matter of
luck; it can be earned over time.
Proof of Concept
The most important document we’ve written is our model legislation, the Responsible AI
Act (RAIA). By showing what a more comprehensive AI safety bill could look like, our
model legislation serves as a valuable proof of concept, and gives policymakers a concrete
reference point for discussing improvements and trade-offs. 
Our accomplishment has still has not been matched by any other organization or even by
Congress itself. We published the first edition of our model legislation in April 2024, and
we updated that legislation in April 2025 to present a more Republican-friendly scheme
that relies more heavily on private auditors and less heavily on bureaucracy and
administrative law. By contrast, Senators Hawley and Blumenthal put out a one-page
framework in September 2023, but they never published any legislation to flesh out that
framework. Senators Romney, Reed, Moran, and King published a two-page framework in
April 2024, which they ultimately developed into legislation in December 2024, but this
legislation narrowly focuses on preventing misuse risks related to weapons of mass
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
6/35

destruction – Senator Romney’s legislation does not make any provision for dealing with
the risk that AI could be misaligned with human values or the risk that AI could destabilize
the global balance of power. 
Outcomes -- Congressional Engagement
In terms of ‘outcomes’ (as opposed to ‘outputs’), we’ve had some excellent engagement
with Congressional offices about their AI governance proposals. In three cases, we were
able to suggest edits to an office’s proposed legislation that were accepted by the office and
that would significantly improve the safety impact of that legislation. For example, our
changes would increase the powers of a safety office, or make sure that safety officials
remain financially independent, or ensure that new legislative powers are delegated to an
appropriate government office that will be able to use those powers effectively. We cannot
publicly reveal the exact offices that accepted these changes, because it would be a serious
breach of DC norms, but all of the offices were relatively senior Congresspeople who
exercise significant influence over Congress’s AI policy. The particular bills that we edited
did not pass Congress, but this is because almost nothing passed out of the 118th Congress;
it was a historically slow and unproductive session. 
We also publicly endorsed about a dozen bills that would have a positive impact on AI
safety; three of the offices sponsoring these bills included us in their official press releases,
citing us by name and including our full quote in support of the bills. The House
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology also linked to our
endorsement for several of the bills that they recommended. We were literally the only
organization listed as an endorser of the Nucleic Acid Screening Act, which is probably the
second most important piece of AI bio-risk legislation to be introduced in 2024. I'll talk
more about this in my second blog post, but I think it's pretty insane that nobody else
stepped up to endorse the Nucleic Acid Screening Act. The bill is relatively uncontroversial;
it would have provided $5 million in funding to develop know-your-customer protocols for
biolabs who are selling synthetic DNA to the public. The problem this bill was trying to
address is that terrorists could soon use AI to generate a protein sequence that could be
used as a bioweapon, and then pay to have that sequence mailed to them at a throwaway
address. When bills like this don't collect endorsements from public advocates, it sends a
message to Congress that experts don't see this as an important risk and that they can
save their political capital for other projects.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
7/35

We also endorsed two Congressional candidates who pledged to promote AI safety if
elected. One of those candidates, Rep. Tom Kean, Jr. (R-NJ) later went on to pose sharp
questions in a letter to AI CEOs, asking them to follow up on their voluntary security
commitments; this letter echoed some of the language that we used in our candidate
survey. Finally, we have been actively involved with the FY2026 appropriations process and
the FY2026 NDAA, which are essentially the only two bills that Congress must pass every
year. Several Congressional offices specifically and proactively invited us to submit
proposals for adding AI safety measures to defense funding or to general funding. We have
submitted fifteen such proposals and are actively following up with those offices in an
effort to get them included in the final legislation. 
Taken together, we feel that these achievements show that Congress is taking our
concerns seriously and is engaging with us as a useful legislative partner. While it is true
that even the most unwelcome advocacy groups will often be able to get a meeting or two
with a low-level legislative correspondent (because it is easier for Congress to humor such
groups than to openly offend them by refusing to meet), our Congressional engagement
goes far beyond being humored or tolerated. We routinely have multiple meetings with
higher-level staff like legislative directors and committee counsels, and they routinely
reach out to us to ask us for our opinions or advice. We think this is good evidence that
these same people would also ask us for advice if they were considering strong AI safety
legislation after a warning shot, and we are pleased to have developed these relatively firm
political connections in a relatively short period of time.
Finally, our grassroots organizing is beginning to bear fruit. Our first in-person grassroots
event was our February ‘demo day’, which brought 14 university AI safety teams from
around the country to Capitol Hill to present interactive demonstrations of AI risks to
Congressional staffers, as well as to Congressman Bill Foster, who visited for half an hour
and toured the exhibits. We have since expanded this college network to include a total of
25 colleges, and we are working on recruiting similar volunteers from trade associations,
such as the national associations of social workers, teachers, psychologists, and
firefighters. The plan is to leverage these connections to bring hundreds of volunteers to
DC for a national day of action in fall of 2025.
Context
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
8/35

An important piece of context to use when evaluating CAIP’s accomplishments is that we
have only recently been able to assemble our complete team. When we launched in June
2023, our 4-person team was composed entirely of volunteers, none of whom had any prior
political experience at all. Shortly after we made our first few professional hires in winter
2023, much of the original team of volunteers quit and moved on to other projects, leaving
us short-staffed again. In order to hire additional team members, we first had to raise
additional funding. I wound up wearing at least three different hats – I was originally
hired as CAIP’s legislative director, and I remained responsible for writing and editing
CAIP’s model legislation and reviewing outside legislative proposals to consider them for
edits and endorsements. In addition to these duties, I also had to manage our team and
recruit and hire new staff. Until October 2024, we had no director of development, so I was
also writing all of our fundraising applications. We did not reach our full complement of
ten team members until January 2025; on average, we’ve gotten our work done with about
six full-time equivalent positions. For six people working over less than two years with
significant interruptions and turnover, I think we’ve gotten a lot done.
OUR PROPOSED POLICIES
Mandatory Audits for Frontier AI
The primary legislative tool that we recommend for coping with catastrophic risks from AI
is a regime of mandatory private audits backed up by a small new government office that
has special powers to proactively recruit the tech talent needed to assess whether these
audits are accurate and complete, and to block the deployment of a new model whenever
they are not satisfied by an audit. 
Today, some (but not all) AI developers voluntarily hire third-party evaluators to comment
on the catastrophic risks posed by their frontier AI systems. However, these evaluators
have relatively little bargaining power, because the company has no legal obligation to
conduct an audit at all. 
As a result, many companies can and do limit evaluators’ degree of access to the final
model – most evaluations are conducted on “preview” or prototype models that do not
have the full set of capabilities of the model that will be commercially deployed, and even
these limited evaluations are often rushed or incomplete. By making such evaluations a
legal requirement, and by giving the government the power to block deployment of a
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
9/35

model if an audit appears to be inadequate, we can improve the bargaining power of
auditors and give them the power to honestly share all of their concerns about each new
frontier AI model, with some degree of confidence that these concerns will force the
developer to add additional safeguards or, if necessary to protect public safety, delay or
cancel the deployment of their model.
Liability Reform
Our model legislation also includes a liability package, which would explicitly provide for
joint and several liability when model developers, plug-in developers, and/or end users all
contribute to causing a catastrophic harm. This would make sure that developers can't
escape accountability for the foreseeable consequences of their actions by 'delegating'
responsibility for their misconduct to under-capitalized business partners. 
Our liability rules would also create a public right of action (allowing the federal
government to sue on behalf of the public when AI models create major security risks) and
a limited private right of action (allowing groups of people to sue for compensation if they
have suffered at least $1 billion in tangible damages from an AI disaster.)
We think liability is a good complement to regulation, because the government will never
know everything worth knowing about the risks posed by a private company's AI or which
strategies would most efficiently mitigate those risks. Giving the company a financial
incentive to avoid causing catastrophes -- even if they have a permit to deploy their AI --
will help motivate the company to put its private information to good use.
Hardware Monitoring
Our model legislation also includes minimum cybersecurity requirements and know-
your-customer requirements for the largest data centers, as well as a very modest
reporting requirement for wholesalers who sell at least 100 specialized AI chips in the
same quarter.
Much of the point of these requirements is to help the government build an internal model
of who's accumulating AI chips, what they plan to do with them, and what (if any) sudden
changes are showing up in the market. To that end, the reporting requirements are backed
by special talent recruitment provisions that would make it easier for the government to
quickly hire qualified technical personnel and pay them a salary that isn't woefully below
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
10/35

market for their skill set -- we assume that building a useful picture of how America uses
its AI chips will require both good data and competent analysts. 
Understanding what's happening in the world of AI will help the government make better
policy decisions across the board, and it also creates a greater ability for the government to
press the 'off switch' or a 'pause button' if and when it decides that it is no longer tolerable
for private companies to be developing superintelligence. We're not advocating for a pause
on AI development, but we do think the government should have the capacity to
implement a pause if and when it decides to do so. Right now, the government has no list
of the country's data centers, and no way of quickly finding out who might be building new
data centers. By the time the government realized it wanted to pause AI development and
built a brand-new capacity to do so, it might be too late, so we have to start building that
capacity now. For further consideration of this point, please see Question 1 in our section
on "Responses to Common Policy Objections."
Emergency Powers
Finally, our model legislation includes authorization for the government to take immediate
action if they notice that an AI system is in the process of causing catastrophic harm or
escaping from human control. Of course, these powers will not be relevant for every type of
disempowerment scenario -- some kinds of disempowerment are so gradual that there
would be time to pass normal legislation to cope with them, and some superintelligence
explosions are so rapid that no realistic government response could hope to affect their
trajectory once they have begun. 
However, for the intermediate scenarios where a rogue AI or a reckless AI developer needs
a few days or a few weeks to complete their attempt to seize power, it is important to make
sure that the government can respond within that time frame, and that the response will
be proportional, appropriate, pre-planned, and lawful. Under the current state of affairs,
where the government has no legal authority to intervene in an AI emergency, we risk both
a response that is too weak (because people delay while trying to figure out what they're
allowed to do or what they're supposed to do) and a response that is too strong (because
the government overreacts and, e.g., nationalizes all advanced AI in response to a marginal
threat). Saying in advance how the government is supposed to respond to an emerging AI
crisis gives us a better chance of getting a well-calibrated response.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
11/35

Further Details
For further details on our model legislation, including the full text of our proposed bill,
please see aipolicy.us/work/model.
RESPONSES TO COMMON POLICY
OBJECTIONS
1. Why not push for a ban or pause on
superintelligence research?
We think the policies we’re promoting are already as intense as we can make them while
still getting Congress to listen to the content of our arguments. Our experience has been
that talking to Congressional staffers about a ban or pause on superintelligence research
tends to result in blank stares and a rapid end to the meeting. By contrast, talking about
mandatory security audits has yielded respectful interest, invitations to come back and
meet with increasingly senior staff, invitations to edit and publicly endorse the office’s AI
bills, and so on. A global moratorium on superintelligence research would probably be
more effective than mandatory security audits at protecting against existential risk if it
that moratorium could be enacted and enforced – but we don’t see anything that we can do
to help make that happen. Rather than make essentially zero progress toward the best
possible policy, we’d rather make some progress toward a marginally helpful policy.
We’re confident that mandatory security audits would be marginally helpful if passed,
because right now there is no federal law of any kind that requires AI developers to guard
against existential risks. It is 100% legal to make an AI that might attempt to become
superintelligent, take over the world’s economy, and use the world’s resources for
inscrutable artificial goals that are bad for humanity. There is no requirement of any kind
to run any kind of safety testing or evaluation or even to assert that an AI is safe before
deploying it or publishing its source code. 
Moreover, Congress is not very seriously discussing any such requirements. Congress
spent much of the last two years writing two non-binding reports about AI. Although a few
Members and many staff worked very hard to promote a full and sober assessment of AI's
catastrophic risks, the final reports did not reflect their views. Instead, both reports are full
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
12/35

of generic discussion about the advantages and disadvantages of AI; they do not contain or
outline or even propose any draft legislation that would meaningfully address existential
risks, other than to state, in the broadest possible terms, that terrorists and rogue states
ought to be prevented from misusing AI to develop dangerous weapons. The words
"existential" and "alignment" show up only in two footnotes that were cited to dismiss
existential risks as being unsupported by rigorous evidence. 
The Congressional task forces that created these reports are no longer meeting (at least not
in public), and there are no immediate plans to revive them. When Congress does debate AI
legislation, most of that legislation deals with either voluntary standards that companies
would be free to ignore (as developed by, e.g., NIST and AISI), with export controls that do
not apply to American AI developers, or with subsidies that make it easier for American AI
developers to buy chips and build data centers. There are a few minor exceptions, which
CAIP has actively supported and lobbied for, but in general, the idea that American AGI
developers should be subject to any legally binding requirements of any kind is already at
the very edge of the Overton window. 
We are trying to move the Overton window toward safety by pushing legislation that is as
effective as we can make it without completely losing the attention of our target audience.
Because mandatory security audits are far more effective than anything that Congress is
currently considering, we think it is useful to push Congress in the direction of taking
mandatory security audits seriously. 
We also think that our legislation, if passed, would help create the infrastructure and push
the government to hire the talent that would be needed to implement a pause in the future,
if and when the government decides to do so. While we do not currently advocate for a
moratorium, we think the government ought to have the ability to halt certain kinds of AI
development if and when (and as soon as) this turns out to be necessary.
If the government decided tomorrow to begin enforcing a moratorium on advanced AI
research, it would not know who owns advanced AI chips, who is leasing data centers, or
how to determine which models count as advanced. Worse, it would not have nearly
enough of the right people in-house to rapidly collect and accurately analyze data on these
topics -- so before it could enforce a moratorium, it would first have to hire a brand new
team of technical experts, then have those experts agree on standards, then start
comparing those standards to real-world conditions, and only then -- at least several
months later -- begin telling specific companies to cease certain kinds of operations. One
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
13/35

of the advantages of our model legislation, from the point of view of those who favor a
moratorium, is that our legislation would cut out most of that potentially fatal delay by
immediately beginning the process of collecting data and hiring analysts.
2. Why not support bills that have a better chance of
passing this year, like funding for NIST or NAIRR?
We do spend some of our time supporting more moderate legislation, such as bills that
would increase funding for the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) to
develop voluntary standards on responsible AI, or bills that would have the government
pay for a national compute bank (the National AI Research Resource, or NAIRR) that
academics could use to conduct independent evaluations of various characteristics of AI
models. We’ve publicly endorsed about a dozen such bills, and organized an open letter in
support of them.
These bills already have broad support from many relevant stakeholders, and are
reasonably likely to pass as soon as Congress turns its attention to passing substantive
legislation. For the last 2.5 years or so, Congress has been distracted by wars, internal
leadership struggles, the national budget, and the Presidential election. This has meant
that Congress has passed far fewer bills than is historically typical. We think that these
distractions are the primary reason why Congress hasn’t done more to support NIST and
NAIRR, and that there is little we can do to influence the timing of when these bills pass.
We don’t have the power to radically refocus the topic of Congress’s attention, and once
Congress returns its attention to the topic of AI policy, we think they will naturally want to
pass these bills.
Finally, other organizations that work on AI policy, like Americans for Responsible
Innovation (ARI) and the Institute for AI Policy and Strategy (IAPS), have staked out these
topics as more central to their brand, and as a result, they are better positioned to make
progress on these moderate bills than we are. By contrast, CAIP is one of very few
organizations that are able and willing to openly advocate for mandatory AI safety
standards. As a 501(c)(4) organization that openly discloses its emphasis on preventing
catastrophic risks, we can get right to the point and push for more radical proposals, like
the ones in our model legislation. We want to make sure that we don't neglect this rare
opportunity by diverting too many of our resources to supporting moderate bills.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
14/35

3. If Congress is so slow to act, why should anyone be
working with Congress at all? Why not focus on
promoting state laws or voluntary standards?
The reason why we focus on mandatory federal legal requirements is that we cannot
identify any alternative counterweight that would significantly constrain the existing
culture and financial incentives in Silicon Valley. Right now, companies face enormous
internal and external pressure to release exciting new products as quickly as possible, both
to bolster their financial projections, and to gain market share and public attention at the
expense of their competitors. There is a powerful ‘race to the bottom’ effect that makes it
very difficult for any one or two companies to significantly depart from this norm –
nobody wants to be left behind. 
It is extremely unlikely that a firm set of voluntary standards (as developed by, e.g., NIST or
as embodied in Responsible Scaling Policies) will be agreed to by all major AI developers,
and it only takes one holdout to develop and release recklessly unsafe AI. Even if all
companies publicly say that they agree to a voluntary policy, it is likely that at least one of
them will break their promise, perhaps by rationalizing that the situation has changed, or
simply because they find the temptation to acquire extremely powerful or lucrative AI
more important than the PR benefits of adhering to their public commitments. For
example, OpenAI has already reneged on its promise to devote 20% of its compute to safety
research, and so far they have not faced any financial consequences for this misbehavior –
although many of their safety researchers quit, it does not seem to have affected their
ability to recruit capabilities researchers or to raise additional funding. 
State laws are likely to be somewhat more effective than voluntary commitments at
constraining corporate behavior, but because AI companies enjoy significant federal
support as, e.g., a key to promoting American national security and American economic
advantage, there is a serious risk that the federal government would overrule state AI
safety laws, either directly (via preemption) or indirectly (by putting political pressure on
key actors, as California’s Congressional delegation did to Governor Newsom after the
California legislature passed SB 1047). As a matter of realpolitik, state governments are also
relatively underfunded compared to AI companies, so if the stakes are high enough, then
state governments may be vulnerable to some combination of bribery, blackmail, and
intimidation. For example, Meta alone spent $24 million on lobbying in 2024, compared to
only $20 million for the entire Civil Division of California’s Department of Justice.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
15/35

4. Why would you push the US to unilaterally disarm?
Don’t we instead need a global treaty regulating AI (or
subsidies for US developers) to avoid handing control
of the future to China?
We do support binding international agreements to limit the development of advanced
and/or unsafe AI, but we believe negotiating these agreements will be easier if the US
demonstrates that it is taking AI safety seriously. Our model legislation is intended as a
complement to international diplomacy, not as an alternative to it.
We also think that the net impact of our model legislation would be to widen the US
technical lead over China, because it would impose minimum cybersecurity standards and
know-your-customer requirements that would slow down the rate of tech transfer to
China. Because so much Chinese progress on AI comes from reverse engineering and
generally following America’s lead, we think that cracking down on the flow of technology
to China can more than make up for whatever marginal slow down in US progress results
from insisting on more careful audits of billion-dollar AI models.
We don’t see the international ‘arms race’ in AI as a prisoner’s dilemma where either side
can make private gains if it unilaterally defects. Instead, if either the US or China or both
build misaligned superintelligence, then the entire world loses; the resulting AI will
probably not pursue American or Chinese goals, but will instead pursue artificial goals that
are terrible for all humans. As a result, there are no long-term private gains to be had from
defecting on AI safety. There is some chance that China is enough of a rational actor to see
this and to unilaterally avoid building misaligned superintelligence. If China is behaving
responsibly, then it is in America’s selfish best interest to also behave responsibly. Call this
proposition A. We think the moderate chance that A is true outweighs the very small
chance that both B and C are true at the same time, where B is “recklessly pursuing
superintelligence without adequate safeguards will nevertheless yield an aligned AI that
adopts the values of its creators,” and C is “China is so close behind America in the AI race
that waiting three extra weeks to fully test an AI model will be the margin of victory that
allows China to pass the US.”
5. Why haven’t you accomplished your mission yet? If
your organization is effective, shouldn’t you have
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
16/35

passed some of your legislation by now, or at least
found some powerful Congressional sponsors for it?   
The timeline for our mission is uncertain and is probably longer than most of the projects
that are funded or supported by the effective altruist network. If you fund a research paper,
you can reasonably expect the research to be completed within a few months; if you fund
bednets, you can reasonably expect the first bednets to be distributed less than a year after
you donate, and to get some kind of measurement of public health outcomes not too long
after that. By contrast, Congress operates on its own schedule, which is slow, erratic, and
not subject to our control. Congress might take no action on a topic for months or even
years, no matter how skillfully advocates present their case for new legislation. For that
reason, we do not think of our mission in terms of forcing or convincing Congress to pass
our model legislation this year or next year or at any particular time. Rather, our goal is to
get Congress to feel that our policy proposals are comfortable, serious, and well-
understood, so that if and when Congress is motivated to take real action on the existential
risks from frontier AI, they will believe that there is a solid plan available for doing so, and
they will work with us to improve the quality of their legislation and the odds that the
legislation will pass. Given the enormous benefits of even a small chance of preventing
misaligned superintelligence, we think this is a worthwhile investment.
Congress’s motivation for acting on AI safety might come from having our movement
slowly build grassroots support for the cause. We would expect to see gradual progress in
organizing and mobilizing mass support from both our own operations and from many
other groups such as the AI Safety Awareness Foundation, Pause AI, Encode Justice, and so
on. Building a grassroots movement takes a great deal of time, for three reasons. First, you
need many thousands of volunteers to be truly effective at a national scale. Second, the
movement spreads organically, as individual colleagues and neighbors convince each other
to join the team. Any given volunteer for a political cause is not likely to be passionate
enough to successfully recruit new volunteers until after they’ve had several months to
learn more about the issue and adopt the issue as part of their identity. Third, getting new
people involved often requires some type of large protest or expensive advertising
campaign or other dramatic event, which requires significant advance planning.
Bootstrapping up from a small group of volunteers (like the university AI safety networks)
to a large group of volunteers that can influence national policy takes several iterations.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
17/35

Alternatively, Congress’s motivation to act on AI safety might come from a ‘warning shot’
or other national disaster that radically changes Congress’s sense of what type of AI policy
is necessary and desirable. Either way, we believe it is very important to have a well-
thought-out set of policy proposals already developed and a set of political connections
and relationships in place before the critical window for legislative action. Arguably, in
spring 2023, one such window of opportunity arose as Congress panicked over warnings
from figures like Yoshua Bengio and Sam Altman, but the AI safety movement had neither
a concrete policy to offer nor a political advocacy network to support such a policy, so the
opportunity was wasted. Our mission is to make sure that the next such opportunity (if
any) is not wasted.
OUR TEAM
Building a team to push for AI safety policies in Washington, DC is tricky because the
people who are most likely to have a demonstrated track record of support for AI safety
(philosophers and computer scientists) are among the least likely to have the skills needed
to operate successfully on Capitol Hill (government relations, community organizing, law,
and so on.) To solve this problem, we’ve recruited a mix of both types of people, with the
idea of teaching the traditional AI safety people how to advocate effectively, and teaching
the experienced DC advocates why AI safety is important and how to explain it. This has
taken time – neither advocacy skills nor a deep understanding of existential risks can be
acquired overnight – but overall we’ve made excellent progress at this kind of cross-
training and we now have a relatively effective team that both understands why AI needs
regulations and has the skills to advocate for those regulations.
Executive Director
I am the executive director of CAIP, and my professional background includes time spent
as a product safety litigator, a regulatory compliance counselor, and a data scientist. After
graduating from Harvard Law in 2010, I worked for small, plaintiff-side law firms where I
advocated for people who had been unfairly injured, fired, evicted, or otherwise mistreated.
This put me in touch with a wide variety of ordinary people and honed my ability to tell
compelling stories on behalf of a cause. It also gave me a sense of how many loopholes
there are on the way from “law” to “justice” – just because something is against the law
doesn’t mean it will actually stop happening. I’ve tried to use the insights I gained through
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
18/35

litigation to craft model legislation that eliminates as many of these loopholes as possible,
making it easier for future litigators to enforce AI safety laws. As a compliance counselor, I
helped homeless shelters cope with the often bewildering array of federal regulations that
govern every aspect of their funding and operations. This gave me a visceral sense of why
red tape is harmful and how to minimize it. I’ve tried to use these lessons to refine our
model legislation so that it’s easy to comply with and will pose minimal burdens for
inventors and entrepreneurs. 
I have some data science experience designing models that predict housing prices, fines,
and electoral results. I’m not going to win any awards for technical innovation, but I
understand neural networks well enough to explain them to policymakers, because I’ve
coded them myself. Although I don’t have formal leadership experience before taking over
at CAIP, I informally led and trained teams of professionals at several of my previous jobs,
where I was often the most senior lawyer or senior counselor on my team. I’ve read several
books on management techniques and consulted frequently with an executive coach to
improve my leadership skills; although it’s always difficult to tell whether employees are
trying to flatter you, so far the feedback on my leadership from my team has been
overwhelmingly positive. 
In terms of my personal background, I've been a rationalist and an effective altruist for the
last 15 years.
Government Relations Team
Our government relations team includes Brian Waldrip, Kate Forscey, and Mark Reddish,
each of which has at least a decade of experience working on Capitol Hill. Brian is a former
legislative director for Congressman John Mica (R-FL) and former professional staff to the
US House Committee on Transportation & Infrastructure, where he helped regulate
autonomous vehicles and investigate federal disaster responses. He later worked as Head
of Congressional Affairs for a drone delivery company. Kate Forscey was a senior tech
policy advisor for Congresswoman Anna Eshoo (D-CA) of Silicon Valley, and she also
served as the Director of Legislative Affairs for the Wireless Infrastructure Association and
as Policy Counsel for Public Knowledge, where she advocated for net neutrality and online
privacy laws. Mark Reddish worked as Senior Counsel and Manager of Governmental
Affairs for APCO International, a trade association for first responders and 911 systems. He
also clerked for the Department of Homeland Security and interned for the FCC.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
19/35

Policy Team
Our policy team includes Claudia Wilson, Joe Kwon, and Tristan Williams. Claudia Wilson
has an MPP from Yale and an economics degree from the University of Melbourne. She has
worked for Boston Consulting Group and the OECD. Her financial experience is helping us
accurately estimate the direct and indirect compliance costs of our proposed policies,
showing that America can significantly improve its AI safety without giving up on
innovation. Joe Kwon has a computer science degree from Yale and has four years of post-
bachelors’ research experience with MIT and UC Berkeley, where he studied
interpretability and social cognition. His technical expertise helps us determine
appropriate thresholds for the scope of our model legislation. Tristan Williams worked for
Conjecture and the Center for AI Safety before joining CAIP as a research fellow.
Communications Team
Our communications team includes Marc Ross, Jakub Kraus, and Ivan Torres. Marc Ross
has over 30 years of communications experience, including roles advising the McCain
campaign during his 2008 presidential run, the US-China Business Council, and
Microsoft’s efforts to defend itself against antitrust charges in 2000. He served as a
professor of American Politics at George Washington University. He left CAIP earlier this
month to write a book on globalization, but the culture he built of fearless, friendly
engagement with the press will continue. Jakub Kraus helped develop content for Blue Dot
Impact’s course on AI Safety Fundamentals, did research for the Center for AI Safety, and
has a degree in data science from the University of Michigan. In his capacity as our
technical content lead, he founded and maintains our weekly newsletter, podcast, and
many of our events. Ivan Torres has over a decade of experience as a community organizer,
bringing volunteers together to advocate for a variety of causes and successfully building
coalitions among dozens of previously unaffiliated organizations. He has a degree in
political philosophy and history from Santa Clara University and is passionate about using
the impact of AI to unify activists.
Operations Team
Our operations team includes Marta Sikorski Martin and Kristina Banks of CANOE
Collective. Marta Sikorski Martin has an M.Phil from Oxford and over a decade of
experience as a grants manager and a policy analyst. At the Center for European Policy
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
20/35

Analysis, she grappled with the ongoing threat of nuclear war, which informs her work
advocating for funding to protect against the existential risks from AI. Kristina Banks has
a BA in business administration and a decade of experience handling increasingly
responsible roles in finance and operations management; she handles our accounting, HR,
and administrative needs.
Personnel Changes
As I write this, some of the people on our team are actively looking for other job
opportunities, with my encouragement, because we have a very short runway. As I will
discuss in detail in the third post in this series, we were caught by surprise by traditional
AI safety funders’ refusal to offer us any funding at all in 2025. As a result, even if the
community is generous enough to help us continue our operations, we will probably have
to replace some of our staff. However, these bios are a fair sample of the flavor and level of
expertise that we expect to maintain. 
OUR PLAN IF FUNDED
Assuming we can raise enough funding to continue our operations, some of our immediate
next steps include following through on our NDAA and appropriations proposals, making
sure that the 2025 version of our model legislation is received and understood by staffers
on the relevant committees, pushing for re-introduction and approval of some of the
useful bipartisan AI governance measures that were approved by the Senate Commerce
Committee in 2024, and upgrading our website so that it more clearly showcases our core
policy proposals. We also expect a whistleblower protection bill to be introduced in the
next few weeks. The bill will cover employees at AI developers and will be well-positioned
to gain bipartisan support; we plan to lobby other Congressional offices to keep the bill
moving forward.
Over the next 6 to 12 months, we plan to build on our initial grassroots organizing efforts
to create an influential national network. We are helping local grassroots chapters build
useful skills by organizing AI safety demos in their hometowns, and we will train them to
advocate effectively on behalf of our model legislation when they come to DC this fall. We
also believe we can attract significant additional media attention by mobilizing trade
associations and industry groups from all different walks of life. Part of why the campaign
for SB 1047 was at least partially successful is that it brought in Hollywood actors who were
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
21/35

worried about being replaced by AI. We hope to mobilize members of many such
professions as people increasingly feel that their livelihoods are under threat. It would take
a lot of job loss to add up to total human disempowerment, but, in the meantime, the fact
that AI seems to be at least somewhat reducing the demand for labor in many job
categories serves as a demonstration that AI has the capabilities to do many of those jobs,
which calls attention to the ways that AI can be powerful enough to be extremely
dangerous. 
In the long-term, our plan for driving AI safety legislation forward depends on either
building an effective mass political movement, or on taking advantage of a highly
dramatic news cycle, such as an AI-driven disaster or ‘warning shot’. Some kinds of
disasters would be so terrible that they could themselves lead to a collapse of civilization,
but other disasters might be small enough to allow normal government to continue, yet
large enough to drive radical political change. Examples of such events in recent history
include the 9/11 attacks on the World Trade Center (which led to the previously unthinkable
PATRIOT Act), the 2008 financial crisis (which led to the previously implausible Dodd-
Frank Act), and the 2020 COVID pandemic (which prompted record-setting levels of public
welfare payments). We will do what we can to build our own political capacity and to ally
with other advocates to increase our ability to proactively steer Congress’s agenda, but we
acknowledge that this level of power is still many years away, if we can achieve it at all. It is
relatively more likely that we maintain or slightly improve our current level of influence,
and then use that influence to improve the quality and odds of passage of AI safety
legislation after an appropriate crisis.
OUR FUNDING SITUATION
Our Expenses & Runway
Unfortunately, our funding situation can only be described as “dire,” which threatens to
undo nearly all of the benefits described earlier in this post. Our bare minimum budget for
continuing operations with our current team is about $1.6 million per year, or $133k per
month. The vast majority of this funding goes to salaries and health insurance for our 10-
person team, with about 3% going to hosting events, 2% to office space, and 2% on other
admin costs. 
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
22/35

We currently have only about $150k in cash reserves, meaning that if we receive no
additional funding, we can only operate through the end of May 2025 (this month) before
laying off our entire team. The remaining money would go toward paying out accumulated
PTO hours, handling unforeseen expenses, and paying our operations manager to arrange
for an orderly shut down of our corporation.
No Good Way to Cut Costs
We have considered various plans for reducing our staff size, but none of them make sense
in the context of our mission and our strategy. Right now we have two lobbyists covering
all 535 members of Congress plus about 250 committees and subcommittees; cutting one
of those two lobbyists would mean that there would be important Congressional offices
who we don’t get to meet with on a regular basis. In order to do their jobs effectively, our
lobbyists need support from a public policy expert, a technical policy expert, a grassroots
organizer, a grasstops organizer, and a communications director, all of whom need to be
coordinated by some type of executive and who need some type of operational support. We
have tried doing without some of these roles in the past, and it has hurt us politically;
Congressional offices have asked us pointed questions about what part of the public we
represent, or who we have talked to about our legislation, and if we cannot answer these
questions persuasively because we have no one assigned to complete those tasks, then we
lose credibility. We could, if necessary, cut our part-time junior research fellow’s position,
but this would not significantly affect our total budget. We could cut the director of
development position, but this seems short-sighted; having a professional fundraiser on
staff usually pays for itself and then some in the long run.
Similarly, we don't see a sustainable plan for cutting salary expenses while still
accomplishing our mission. Our current burn rate of $133k/month assumes no raises, no
performance bonuses, no adjustments for inflation, and no additional hires beyond a
replacement for our communications director, who recently resigned to write a book. Our
salaries are already well below market rate for our highly experienced team in a relatively
high-cost-of-living area (Washington DC) and reflect everyone’s willingness to take a pay
cut in order to work on a mission that they believe in. We experimented in 2024 with
offering even lower salaries, but the candidates we attracted at those lower rates tended to
have serious and obvious problems.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
23/35

Because our non-salary expenses are less than 10% of our total costs, we don't think we
can fix our budget by skimping on, e.g., office supplies or our occasional work travel.
Our Revenue
We have no guaranteed sources of incoming funding. There are five places where we might
get significant funding before the end of the calendar year: FLI, SFF, the Siegel Foundation,
a private donor who has pledged support for a 501(c)(3) partner organization that we are in
the process of spinning up, and a Manifund application we just launched. There are
difficulties with all five of these funding sources. FLI’s grant is extremely competitive, SFF
has recently announced that they will be limiting their grants to 501(c)(4) organizations
like ours, the Siegel Foundation is still in the early stages of preliminary talks with us and
has not yet even agreed to accept an application from us, the private donor’s contribution
is held up by indefinite delays at the IRS, and our Manifund application, which is seeking
donations for a specific project on reducing chem-bio AI risk, is competing with dozens of
projects and we're not sure if we'll be able to reach our goal in time. 
Even if all five of these funding opportunities come through toward the high end of what
we might reasonably hope for, they would still just barely cover our expenses for the year,
and they would leave us with no runway going into 2026. In practice, we have to expect
that one or more of these grants will either not come through or will offer us less than we
are hoping for. There are also cash flow issues – the FLI grant will not be announced until
June, the SFF grant will probably not be paid out until September or October, and any
support from the Siegel Foundation would arrive, if at all, toward the end of 2025.
Surprise Budget Deficit
The main reason we have such a large budget deficit is that our reputation in the AI safety
funding community seems to have quietly plummeted. In 2024, we had a positive
reputation among AI safety donors and evaluators. This led to several donors writing six-
figure checks after only a half-hour Zoom call. Our bottleneck appeared to be hiring, rather
than funding – I was hiring people as quickly as I could identify people who would be a
good fit for the role; it took about 80 hours of work to identify and recruit a new staff
member, and only about 1 hour of work to raise the funds to pay that staff member for the
year. 
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
24/35

By contrast, in 2025, CAIP has a lukewarm or neutral reputation, which has led to us being
ghosted or zeroed out by many of the parties who we reasonably expected would support
us. We have unsuccessfully sought funding from Open Philanthropy, Longview
Philanthropy, Macroscopic Ventures, Long-Term Future Fund, Manifund, MIRI, Scott
Alexander, and JueYan Zhang. None of these parties had any specific critiques of our work
that they were able to share with us – instead, they simply said that there were other
funding opportunities that seemed more promising to them, or that politics no longer
seems to them like an effective way of promoting AI safety, or that they had heard from
third parties that CAIP was not a valuable funding opportunity. 
In the second and third blog posts in this series, I will discuss why I believe this lukewarm
assessment is mistaken and where the mistake is coming from. For now, I simply want to
point out that our urgent request for your money is not based on a budgeting or planning
failure. Rather, we chose a size for our team in 2024 that seemed modest and conservative
based on the apparent amount of available funding at that time, and then in 2025, our
funding suddenly dropped by over 50%, meaning that even our conservative level of
spending is unsustainable.
The Bottom Line
What all of this boils down to is that we cannot continue our operations without support
from people like you. None of us are independently wealthy, and we cannot afford to carry
on our work for free, no matter how important it is. If we cannot get support from
institutions, then we will need support from individual donors, or we will have to shut
down. We urge you to donate – we can accept contributions of up to $10,000
at https://www.centeraipolicy.org/donate, and if you are considering a larger donation,
then you can reach me at jason@aipolicy.us and I will be very happy to discuss it with you.
If you prefer to support a specific CAIP project, you can donate to our Manifund project on
reducing chem-bio AI risk and help us reach our fundraising goal there.
Next:
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
25/35

Mentioned in
122
61
53
45
The Need for Political Advertising
(Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance)
No comments
61 karma
Log in to save where you left off
Comments 25
Sorted by New & upvoted
LeahC
4
2
1
46
Unfortunately, there was an effective effort to tie AI safety advocacy organizations to their funders in a way
that increased risk to any high-profile donors who supported federal policy work. I don't know if this
impacted any of your funders' decisions, but the related media coverage could have been cause for concern
(ie Politico). Small dollar donations might help balance this. 
It seems very likely that the federal government will attempt to override any state AI regulation that gets
passed in the next year. Jason put together a strong, experienced team that can navigate the quickly shifting
terrain in Washington. Dissolving immediately due to lack of funding would be an unfortunate outcome at a
critical time.
Context: I work in government relations on related issues and met Jason at an EAG in 2024. I have not
worked with CAIP or pushed for their model legislation, but I respect the team.
MichaelDickens
4
4
17
There is a related concern where most of the big funders either have investments in AI companies, or have
close ties to people with investments in AI companies. This biases them toward funding activities that
won't slow down AI development. So the more effective an org is at putting the brakes on AGI, the harder a
time it will have getting funded.*
Props to Jaan Tallinn, who is an early investor in Anthropic yet has funded orgs that want to slow down AI
(including CAIP).
*I'm not confident that this is a factor in why CAIP has struggled to get funding, but I wouldn't be surprised
if it was.
The Center for AI Policy Has Shut Down
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance)
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance)
‘GiveWell for AI Safety’: Lessons learned in a week
1y
1y
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
26/35

Esben Kran
2
0
13
To me, it's an interesting decision to pull funding because of this type of coverage. There's a tendency in
AIS lobbying to never say what we actually mean to "get in the right rooms" but then when we want to say
the thing that matters at a pivotal time, nobody will listen because we got there by being quiet.
Buckling under the pressure of the biggest lobby to ever exist (tech) putting out one or two hit pieces is
really unfortunate. Same arguments can be made for why UK AISI and the AI Safety Summits didn't
become even bigger; simply that there was no will to continue the lobbying move and everyone was too
afraid of reputation.
Happy to hear alternative perspectives, of course.
Neel Nanda
9
1
37
I'm sorry to hear that CAIP is in the situation, and this is not at all my area of expertise/I don't know much
about CAIP specifically, so I do not feel qualified to judge this myself.
That said, I will note on the meta level that there is major adverse selection when funding an org in a bad
situation that all other major funders have passed on funding, and I would be personally quite hesitant to
fund CAIP here without thinking hard about it or getting more info.
Funders typically have more context and private info than me, and with prominent orgs like this there's
typically a reason, but funders are strongly disincentived from making the criticism public. In this case, one
of the stated reasons CAIP quotes is "had heard from third parties that CAIP was not a valuable funding
opportunity" can be a very good reason if the third party is trustworthy and well informed, and often critics
would prefer to be anonymous. I would love to hear more about the exact context here, and why CAIP
believes they are making a mistake that readers should ignore, to assuage fears of adverse selection
I generally only recommend donating this when you are:
Confident the opportunity is low downside (which seems false in the context of political advocacy)
If you have a decent idea of why those funders declined that you disagree with
Or you think sufficiently little of all mentioned funders (Open Philanthropy, Longview Philanthropy,
Macroscopic Ventures, Long-Term Future Fund, Manifund, MIRI, Scott Alexander, and JueYan Zhang)
that you don't update much
You feel you have enough context to make an informed judgement yourself, and grant makers are not
meaningfully more well informed than you
I'm skeptical that the reason is really just that it's politically difficult for most funders to fund political
advocacy. It's harder, but there's a fair amount of risk tolerant private donors, at least. If it were, I expect
they would be back channelling to other less constrained funders that CAIP is a good opportunity, or
possibly making public that they did not have an important reason to decline/think the org does good work
(as Eli Rose did for Lightcone). I would love for any to reply to my comment saying this is all paranoia! There
are other advocacy orgs that are not in as dire a situation.
11mo
1y
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
27/35

PabloAMC 🔸
0
0
10
I think this makes sense, but it seems kind of disconnected from the presentation, which seemed to
indicate CAIP proposes reasonable policy and has a strong team. Perhaps Jason can clarify why he thinks
major donors have passed on this opportunity.
Jason Green-Lowe
1
1
2
25
I wish I could! Unfortunately, despite having several conversations and emails with the various AI safety
donors, I'm still confused about why they are declining to fund CAIP. The message I've been getting is
that other funding opportunities seem more valuable to them, but I don't know exactly what criteria or
measurement system they're using.
At least one major donor said that they were trying to measure counterfactual impact -- something like,
try to figure out how much good the laws you're championing would accomplish if they passed, and then
ask how close they got to passing. However, I don't understand why this analysis disfavors CAIP.
Compared to most other organizations in the space, the laws we're working on are less likely to pass, but
would do much more good if they did pass.
Another possible factor is that my co-founder, Thomas Larsen, left CAIP in the spring of 2024, less than a
year after starting the organization. As I understand it, Thomas left because he learned that political
change is harder than he had initially thought, and because he felt frustrated that CAIP was not powerful
enough to accomplish its mission within the short time that he expects we have left before
superintelligence is deployed, and because he did not see a good fit between the skills he wanted to use
(research, longform writing, forecasting) and CAIP's day-to-day needs.
Thomas's early departure is obviously an important piece of information that weighs against donating to
CAIP, but given the context, I don't think it's reasonable for institutional donors to treat it as decisive. I
actually agree with Thomas's point that CAIP's mission is very ambitious relative to our resources and
that we most likely will not succeed. However, I think it's worth trying anyway, because the stakes are so
high that even a small chance of success is very valuable.
James Herbert
3
1
21
If I were to bet on what's happened here, I'd bet it's something to do with Thomas leaving. 
Looking at his LinkedIn and his Forum history, he seems very well connected in the field of AI safety.
I suspect it was easy to get funding because people knew and trusted him.  
Otto
3
1
9
If you're right, I think that would point to xrisk space funders trusting individuals way too much and
institutions way too little. Thomas is a great guy but one guy losing belief in his work (which happens
all the time mostly for private reasons, and mostly independent of the actual meaning of the work)
1y
1y
1y
10mo
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
28/35

should never be a reason to defund an otherwise functioning org, doing seemingly crucial work.
If the alternative theory is correct and the hit pieces are to blame, that still seems like an incorrect
decision. When you're lobbying for something important you can expect some pushback, that
shouldn't be a reason to pull out immediately.
James Herbert
0
0
3
I agree! 
Jason Green-Lowe
1
0
2
Very well said! I think your first paragraph sums up the most important parts of the story of why CAIP
was defunded -- Thomas lost interest, mostly for private reasons, and the x-risk funders relied far too
heavily on this data point. In part this is because the x-risk funders appear to lack any kind of formal
grantmaking criteria, as I write about in post 7° of this sequence.
Neel Nanda
2
1
8
I do not feel qualified to judge the effectiveness of an advocacy org from the outside - there's a lot of
critical information like whether they're offending people, if they're having an impact, whether they're
sucking up oxygen from other orgs in the space, if their policy proposals are realistic, if they're making
good strategic decisions, etc, that I don't really have the information to evaluate. So it's hard to engage
deeply with an org's case for itself, and I default to this kind of high level prior. Like, the funders can also
see this strong case and still aren't funding it, so I think my argument stands
Jason Green-Lowe
1
1
3
19
I think these are great criteria, Neel. If one or more of the funders had come to me and said, "Hey, here
are some people who you've offended, or here are some people who say you're sucking up their
oxygen, or here's why your policy proposals are unrealistic," then I probably would have just accepted
their judgment and trusted that the money is better spent elsewhere. Part of why I'm on the forum
discussing these issues is that so far, nobody has offered me any details like that; essentially all I have is
their bottom-line assessment that CAIP is less valuable than other funding opportunities.
PabloAMC 🔸
3
2
4
I think we agree. Thinking out loud: Perhaps the community should consider a way to have a more
transparent way of making these decisions. If we collectively decide to follow large funders, but are
unable to understand their motives, it is impossible to have fund diversification.
10mo
10mo
1y
1y
1y
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
29/35

gergo
6
1
2
28
Disclaimer: I have a friend working at CAIP.
It's incredibly sad to hear CAIP might needs to shut down. They are one of the very few adults in the room in
Washington. If their team doesn't meet the bar of funders, I don't know who else should. 
(Of course, it's more complicated than that, see LeahC's comment°).
Marcus Abramovitch 🔸
3
1
13
I really wish donors would write up their reasons for/against funding things like Manifund does. It really
doesn't take long, so I don't buy the usual "time constraints" argument, but I think the people at CAIP would
waste a lot LESS time if they were told "we don't think your work is good/meets the funding bar. These other
orgs are better at it for the cost and would rather scale them up than fund your organization." It'd waste a lot
LESS grantee time. They can just add a disclaimer that this isn't any way an abdication of their character or
something.
That said, I looked at CAIP, and while you say here what you've accomplished, it seems hard to verify that. I
searched the EA forum and the internet, and only 2 people you list in your staff have posted on the forum
here, and one more has an account. I didn't do the same for LW or AF, but I expect similar there, maybe a bit
more. It's going to be very hard to get 7 figures per year for your non-profit if you aren't very public about
what you are doing. I know that takes time, but if you aren't advertising the work you do, people won't know
about it.
Here, in this post, you sort of just make a new account and say, "If we don't get $1.6M soon, we are shutting
down". That's... a lot of money. It's hard to overstate how hard it is to make and then donate that amount of
money per year. But more importantly, it'd be very weird if this worked. There needs to be a lot more
constant communication and updates from organizations if they want to continue to receive funding. It begs
the question, what does the "Communications Team" do? I know they are probably primarily responsible for
communicating with congresspeople, but at least some of that needs to be communicating with the EA/AIS
community.
Jason Green-Lowe
1
0
1
9
Marcus, I agree with your first paragraph -- part of my frustration is that it's not obvious to me that any AI
governance donors have more than a vibes-based metric for what it means for "other orgs to be better at it
for the cost." Donors did eventually tell us that they thought other orgs were more cost-effective, but they
couldn't or wouldn't say which effects they thought were cheaper elsewhere or how they were measuring
that.
In hindsight, you may be right that we should have posted earlier on Less Wrong and EA Forums. I will say
that we did not see raising significant amounts of money directly from the public (rather than from large
donors and institutional donors) as a promising strategy, and that we turned to it only as a last resort when
institutional funding unexpectedly ran dry.
1y *
11mo
11mo
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
30/35

However, I object to your implication that until recently we haven't been communicating or sending
updates about our work. You may recall that in October 2023, you and I met in person at EA Global
Boston, where I pitched you about our work. At your request, I sent you a 15-page document in March
2024 in which I quantitatively estimated the microdooms averted by CAIP's work. You seemed to agree
that our work was promising, but at EA Global Boston October 2024, you told me that you were donating
only to animal welfare charities. You did not share any criticisms of our work at that time other than that it
was not in your preferred cause area.
Our communications team sends out a weekly newsletter to 1,400 subscribers, which is also publicly
posted on LinkedIn and X. We also sent out various documents to past and prospective donors, including a
detailed annual report that included a dozen examples of us being cited favorably in mainstream media,
along with links. We have hosted regular in-person events that are open to the public, where anyone can
come and see for themselves which Congressional staffers are coming and speaking with us. If any of the
donors had at any time expressed any concerns about our accomplishments being "hard to verify," we
would have gladly taken them along to one of our meetings or events or sent them whatever additional
information they might have wanted. However, I have never before heard any such complaints.
Marcus Abramovitch 🔸
1
0
7
Yes, I do recall meeting at EAG two years ago and yes, I wasn't giving any money to AI safety back then. I
don't have any criticism because I don't know better about what policies to support and didn't want to
add noise.
I don't want to be too critical of CAIP here and my original comment might have come off as too harsh.
I'm not a big fan of the current funding ecosystem being so private with info and reasoning being so
secretive. It's caused us harm before and I expect will cause us harm again and I expect even greater it is
causing passive harm where organizations don't improve.
Throwaway81
1
1
9
This contains several inaccuracies and misleading statements that I won't fully enumerate, but at least 2: 
1. The Nucleic Acid Synthesis Act does not at all "require biolabs that receive federal funding to confirm
the real identity of customers who are buying their synthetic DNA." It empowers NIST to create
standards and best practices for screening.
2. It's not the case that "The particular bills that we edited did not pass Congress, but this is because
almost nothing passed out of the 118th Congress." Lots of bills passed in the CR and other packages.
But it was a historically dysfunctional and slow year
Personal gripe: the model legislation is overly prescriptive in a way that does not future proof the statute
enough to protect against the fast moving nature of AI and how governance may need to shift and adapt. 
Jason Green-Lowe
3
0
20
11mo
1y
1y
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
31/35

Your point about the Nucleic Acid Synthesis Act is well-taken; while writing this post, I confused the
Nucleic Acid Synthesis Act with Section 4.4(b)(iii) of Biden's 2023 Executive Order, which did have that
requirement. I'll correct the error.
We care a lot about future-proofing our legislation. Section 6 of our model legislation takes the unusual
step of allowing the AI safety office to modify all of the technical definitions in the statute via regulation,
because we know that the paradigms that are current today might be outdated in 2 years and irrelevant in
5. Our bill would also create a Deputy Administrator for Standards whose section's main task would be to
keep abreast of "the fast moving nature of AI" and to update the regulatory regime accordingly. If you have
specific suggestions for how to make the bill even more future-proof without losing its current efficacy,
we'd love to hear them.
Throwaway81
0
0
1
Sure, I'm not going to be able to respond any more to this thread but the methods of governance
prescribed themselves are not future proof, as AI governance may need may change as the tech or
landscape changes, and the definitions are not future proof. 
Holly Elmore ⏸️ 🔸
3
0
8
Then there should be future legislation? Why is it on CAIP and this legislation to foresee the entire
future? That’s a prohibitively high bar for regulation.
Throwaway81
1
3
4
Most legislation is written broadly enough so that it won't have to be repealed because it's rare that
legislation is repealed. For example, take their current definition of frontier AI model, which is extremely
prescriptive and uses 10^26 in some cases. Usually to be future proof these definitions will be written
broadly enough such that the executive can update the technical specifics as the technology
advances. Those types of regulations are the sorts of things that would include such details, but not
the legislation. I can imagine a future where models are all over 10^26 and meet the other requirements
of the model act's definition of frontier AI model. The reason to even govern the frontier in the first
place is because you don't know what's coming -- it's not like we know that dangerous capabilities
emerge at 10^26 so there's no reason to use this threshold as putting models under regulatory scrutiny
forever. Also (eventually) we might achieve some algorithmic efficiency breakthroughs in which the
most capable (and therefore dangerous) models don't need as much compute anymore and so might
not even qualify as frontier AI models under the Act anymore. So I see the risk of this bill first capturing
a bunch of models that it doesn't mean to cover and then possibly not covering any models -- all
because it's not written in a future proof way. The bill is written more like a regulation for for the
executive level rather than the legislative level.
Holly Elmore ⏸️ 🔸
3
0
1
12
Feels like your true objection here is that frontier AI development just isn't that dangerous? Otherwise
I don't know how you could be more concerned about the few piddling "inaccuracies and misleading
1y
1y
1y
1y
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
32/35

statements that I won't fully enumerate" than nobody doing CAIP's work to get the beginnings of
safeguards in place. 
Jason Green-Lowe
1
0
9
Our model legislation does allow the executive to update the technical specifics as the technology
advances. 
The very first text in the section on rulemaking authority is "The Administrator shall have full power to
promulgate rules to carry out this Act in accordance with section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
This includes the power to update or modify any of the technical thresholds in Section 3(s) of this Act
(including but not limited to the definitions of “high-compute AI developer,” “high-performance AI
chip,” and “major AI hardware cluster”) to ensure that these definitions will continue to adequately
protect against major security risks despite changes in the technical landscape such as
improvements in algorithmic efficiency." This is on page 12 of our bill.
I'm not sure how we could make this clearer, and I think it's unreasonable to attack the model
legislation for not having this feature, because it very much does have this feature.
SummaryBot
0
0
7
Executive summary: In this first of a three-part series, Jason Green-Lowe, Executive Director of the Center
for AI Policy (CAIP), makes an urgent and detailed appeal for donations to prevent the organization from
shutting down within 30 days, arguing that CAIP plays a uniquely valuable role in advocating for strong,
targeted federal AI safety legislation through direct Congressional engagement, but has been unexpectedly
defunded by major AI safety donors.
Key points:
1. CAIP focuses on passing enforceable AI safety legislation through Congress, aiming to reduce
catastrophic risks like bioweapons, intelligence explosions, and loss of human control via targeted
tools such as mandatory audits, liability reform, and hardware monitoring.
2. The organization has achieved notable traction despite limited resources, including over 400
Congressional meetings, media recognition, and influence on draft legislation and appropriations
processes, establishing credibility and connections with senior policymakers.
3. CAIP’s approach is differentiated by its 501(c)(4) status, direct legislative advocacy, grassroots
network, and emphasis on enforceable safety requirements, which it argues are necessary
complements to more moderate efforts and international diplomacy.
4. The organization is in a funding crisis, with only $150k in reserves and no secured funding for the
remainder of 2025, largely due to a sudden drop in support from traditional AI safety funders—despite
no clear criticism or performance concerns being communicated.
1y
1y
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
33/35

5. Green-Lowe argues that CAIP’s strategic, incremental approach is politically viable and pragmatically
impactful, especially compared to proposals for AI moratoria or purely voluntary standards, which lack
traction in Congress.
6. He invites individual donors to step in, offering both general and project-specific funding options,
while previewing upcoming posts that will explore broader issues in AI advocacy funding and
movement strategy.
This comment was auto-generated by the EA Forum Team. Feel free to point out issues with this summary by
replying to the comment, and contact us if you have feedback.
More from Jason Green-Lowe
View more
Curated and popular this week
Impact Requires Implementation: What Dispensers for Safe Water Scale-Back Can Teach
Us About Monitoring
 · 13d ago · 17m read  · 
3
63
· 11mo ago · 38m read
5
Jason Green-Lowe
61
· 1y ago · 16m read
0
Jason Green-Lowe
53
· 10mo ago · 45m read
2
Jason Green-Lowe
Tony Senanayake
TL;DR Between 2022 and 2023, GiveWell and Open Philanthropy committed over $70 million to Evidence
Action’s Dispensers for Safe Water programme. An independent survey in 2025 found that in Uganda and
Malawi the programme was reaching approximately 70% fewer people with detectable chlorine than its…
Shift Resources to Advocacy Now (Post 4 of 7 on AI Governance)
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance)
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance)
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
34/35

The AI people have been right a lot
 · 4d ago · 7m read  · 
11
In Development Magazine Launch
 · 4d ago · 1m read  · 
4
Recent opportunities in AI safety
View more
Dylan Matthews
This post was crossposted from Dylan Matthew's blog by the EA Forum
team. The author may not see or reply to comments. ----------------------------
------------ Subtitle: Try to keep an open mind as the world gets increasingl…
Lauren Gilbert
We're announcing a new development magazine: In Development. Our goal is to promote discourse on
development without dogma. In other words, we public stories doing deep dives into pressing
development issues, backed up by evidence, argument, and experience. The first piece is by Paul…
2
· 8h ago · 1m read
0
postreal
80
· 11d ago · 8m read
4
Garrison
11
· 13h ago · 3m read
0
Tobias Häberli, Tilman, James Nicholas Bryant, Ariel
Introducing the Labor Automation Forecasting Hub
Help me launch Obsolete: a book aimed at building a new movement for …
Pivotal Research Fellowship applications are open (deadline May 3)
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used and
to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to their
use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our cookie
policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/9uZHnEkhXZjWzia7F
35/35
