AN ACTIVIST VIEW OF AI GOVERNANCE
AI safety
Building effective altruism
AI governance
Criticism of effective altruist causes
Public communication on AI safety
Research agendas, questions, and project lists
Frontpage
Show all topics
In previous posts in this sequence, I laid out a case for why most AI governance research is
too academic and too abstract to have much influence over the future. Politics is noisy and
contested, so we can’t expect that good AI governance ideas will spread on their own – we
need a large team of people who are actively promoting those ideas. Unfortunately, we
currently have at least 3 researchers for every advocate, so many policy ideas have been
“orphaned,” i.e., nobody is taking those ideas and showing them to decision-makers who
have the power to implement them.
The best way of addressing this imbalance would be to shift funding and jobs from
research to advocacy. However, as a practical matter, I don’t expect many funders to heed
my arguments, nor do I expect many researchers to spontaneously quit and look for new
jobs in other fields. So, in this post, I offer tips on how researchers can make their work
more relevant to advocacy by drafting actual policy documents and by making concrete
proposals in their white papers. 
I also catalog eleven orphaned policies that I’m aware of and make suggestions about how
you can “adopt” them. This isn't meant to be a perfect list -- there are good orphaned
policies that I haven't included, and I might have included one or two policies that you find
unimpressive. My hope is that collectively, these policies illustrate the size and scope of the
backlog. 
The important thing isn't that we agree on exactly which policy is best; the important
thing is that we start clearing the backlog and do something -- because right now, we're on
track to accomplish essentially zero policy change, and, as I've argued earlier in this
sequence, the status quo is likely to end in catastrophe.
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI
Governance)
by Jason Green-Lowe
May 29 2025
46
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
Reject
Accept all
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
1/17

DRAFT ACTUAL POLICY DOCUMENTS
The most important thing individual researchers can do to make their work more relevant
is to shift some of their efforts from general academic exploration to drafting actual policy
documents. We have so many good policy proposals that have never gotten beyond the idea
stage, and that need to be fleshed out. 
What I mean by “fleshing out” a policy proposal is to actually draft an example of that
proposal, ideally with specific, well-justified numbers, proper nouns, and mechanisms.
Don’t just say that we ought to have compute monitoring; write a bill that implements it.
Don’t just propose a windfall profits clause; write the corporate governance documents
that would implement it. This is what CAIP did with our model legislation. 
This is not as hard as you might think – there are $50 textbooks that will teach you the
appropriate writing style for legislation or for corporate charters, there are free how-to
guides available online, you can poach other companies’ documents to use as templates,
and you can ask LLMs to review your work and offer advice about where you might need to
make edits. Policymakers will also be forgiving if you make small formatting errors,
especially since they often have professional help for such editing. For example, when
Congressional staffers draft bills, those bills usually get sent to Congress’s Office of
Legislative Counsel, which puts the finishing touches on them.
One of the advantages of drafting actual policy documents is that they’re much shorter
than a typical academic paper – you can have a very helpful bill that’s only three pages
long. This makes it easier to get feedback, and you should ideally be getting feedback from
a wide variety of sources (and make appropriate improvements based on that feedback)
before you show your policies to neutral policymakers. 
Another advantage to drafting actual policies is that it forces you to make choices about
who should do what and how they should do it. This helps you make sure that your ideas
are politically feasible and logistically sound. 
For example, one of the most frequent questions CAIP got when discussing our model
legislation was “which Cabinet department should run your proposed new office?” This
forced us to study the org chart at the Departments of Commerce, Energy, and Homeland
Security so that we could see where our office might fit in. We learned early on that NIST
was a non-regulatory agency and that they weren’t interested in hosting any kind of AI
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
2/17

safety enforcement efforts. This is not something you’d pick up from doing a literature
review, because NIST’s preferences aren’t cited much in the academic literature. Instead, we
caught this issue because drafting actual legislation prompted us to think about where the
office should go, and because we talked to NIST employees to get their perspective. We
eventually concluded that the Commerce Department would need to create a new
regulatory office, which is exactly the solution that Senator Romney proposed in
December 2024.
MAKE YOUR WHITE PAPERS SPECIFIC
If you’re not going to draft an actual policy, you can still be of some help by writing a white
paper that goes into enough concrete detail about what a policy should look like. The
format of the document is less crucial than the fact that it (1) contains concrete details, and
(2) takes a stand in favor of a specific outcome or makes a specific prediction.
Instead of discussing the pros and cons and desiderata of various categories of proposals,
you need to be identifying one proposal you think is best and explaining why that
proposal is best. Instead of saying “the government could require owners of advanced AI
chips to register their location,” a concrete policy proposal would say “the Department of
Energy should hire three full-time agents to collect and analyze annual reports on the
location of all H100 and A100 chips.” 
The latter proposal requires more work, especially if you’re worried about getting the
details right – and that’s exactly the point. As discussed in the second post in this
sequence, policy proposals need to be easy for politicians to implement, or else they’ll
usually move on to something that’s easier. Politicians are insanely busy and
overscheduled. Every minute you ask them to spend sifting through policy alternatives
and figuring out the details of how a hypothetical bill should work is a minute that they
can’t spend pushing their colleagues to co-sponsor and vote for a bill that you’ve already
written. 
As a result, you can get much more traction with Congressional staffers by saying “here’s
the policy we think you should champion” than by saying “gosh, these issues seem like
they might be important and it’d be great if you figured out a way to do something about
that.”
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
3/17

Admittedly, most research work is funded by 501(c)(3) donations that cannot pay for more
than a small amount of direct political advocacy. However, there are ways to word the
conclusion of a research paper that provide clear guidance without crossing the line into
inappropriate political work. True, you might not endorse a bill that’s currently being
debated by Congress, and you certainly shouldn’t be endorsing political candidates, but you
can still truthfully say that one type of policy has better consequences than another. The
law clearly states that “nonpartisan analysis, study, or research may advocate a particular
position or viewpoint so long as there is a sufficiently full and fair exposition of the
pertinent facts to enable the public or an individual to form an independent opinion or
conclusion.”
It’s therefore not “political” to point out that banning A100 chip exports while permitting
A800 chip exports is ineffective; that’s a technical conclusion that a neutral researcher can
reasonably draw. It's not “advocacy” to express an opinion that the next generation of
LLMs will most likely uplift the capabilities of bioweapon designers to a degree that poses
risks that would be considered unacceptable in any other industry. You can have a firm
opinion on an issue without being a politician; nothing about having a 501(c)(3) tax-status
requires you to drown every opinion you offer in a sea of “maybe” and “could” and
“warrants further research.” The point of tax-exempt research is to come up with
scientifically informed opinions that politicians can draw on to inform their work; if your
organization is too timid to firmly express those opinions, then it’s not upholding its part
of the social contract.
A good example of an adequately specific white paper is FAS’s An Early Warning System for
AI. They’ve got a budget, an estimate of the number of staff needed, an administrative
home for the new office, and a step-by-step explanation of who would do what and how it
would work. True, the paper doesn’t literally include the text of model legislation – but
that’s fine, because the paper provides enough detail that a legislator who was convinced
by the paper’s arguments could easily turn the paper over to the Office of Legislative
Counsel and have them translate it into a bill.
CATALOG OF ORPHANED POLICIES
The rest of this post is just a list of examples of the backlog of good policy ideas that, to the
best of my knowledge, have never been adequately fleshed out. For each idea, I try to say
what work is missing and how a researcher might fill in those gaps. If you’ve done
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
4/17

additional work on one of these policies and I’ve overlooked it, please let me know, and I
will update the list accordingly!
Windfall Profits Clause
GovAI proposed in 2020 that AI firms should commit ahead of time to redistribute most of
the profits of transformative AI from its inventor to the rest of humanity. Their paper
includes a possible series of ‘tax brackets,’ which is a useful detail, but they do not include
sample language showing how to add a windfall profits clause to a corporate charter or
corporate bylaws. 
A windfall profits clause is an excellent idea, but to date, no one has drafted a sample
windfall profits clause, let alone tried to persuade any particular corporation to adopt one.
You can help by figuring out which corporate document(s) need to be amended, drafting an
amendment that would have the appropriate effect, and then writing a letter to corporate
social responsibility officers asking them whether they will pass that amendment, and, if
not, why not.
Antitrust Waiver
LawAI proposed in 2021 that the government should issue a waiver to AI developers
promising not to prosecute them under the antitrust laws for meeting to discuss minimum
safety standards. Competitors are normally not allowed to meet with each other to agree
on changes to their business practices, but such a meeting would be allowed if there were
an explicit government waiver, or if the meeting was hosted by a bona fide trade
association that has non-commercial purposes.
The consensus seems to be that companies are not actually that afraid of being prosecuted
for antitrust violations based on negotiating industry-wide minimum safety standards,
but because some companies (e.g. Google) are being actively investigated or prosecuted for
other antitrust violations, the fear that such talks could endanger the parent corporation is
a convenient excuse that can be used by executives to tell an engineer not to pursue safety
agreements. Getting a waiver granted could eliminate that excuse, making such safety
agreements more likely to take place.
Unfortunately, to date, nobody has drafted a sample waiver letter that could be signed by
the Assistant Attorney General for Antitrust, let alone sent that letter to the Assistant
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
5/17

Attorney General and asked them to sign it.
It looks like the Frontier Model Forum is at least a plausible candidate for a non-
commercial trade association that could serve as a protected forum for hashing out safety
agreements, but it's not clear whether this forum has the desire or ability to help
companies enter into binding negotiations, rather than just identify voluntary best
practices.
You can help by writing the waiver letter or by investigating the Frontier Model Forum and
seeing what if anything else they need in order to be more active in setting safety
standards for existential risk from AI.
Strict Liability
Applying a less forgiving set of tort law to harms caused by AI has been discussed for
several years; the Brookings Institute proposed using products liability law in 2019, and
CAIP board member Gabriel Weil published a detailed analysis of several possible liability
reforms in January 2024. California SB 1047 would have made some minor changes or
clarifications to existing tort law, and a few other state legislatures have also considered
modifications. 
However, this should ideally be a 50-state project. Specific language in every state should
be available for legislatures to adopt, and we should also be filing impact litigation that
would give judges a chance to incorporate strict liability for AI into the common law.
You can help by writing a strict liability law for your state and by submitting comments or
articles to a local law review journal arguing in favor of strict liability. Such laws are often
more likely to pass (or be adopted by judges) when they have some academic support, but
the support needs to be registered inside the legal community for it to be noticed.
Visa Reform
Changes to immigration policy that made it easier for AI researchers to move to the US
could reduce the urgency of an ‘arms race.’ Especially if you think that other countries will
be unable to effectively ‘retaliate’ by ratcheting up their own efforts to recruit personnel,
then this type of visa reform would place America further in the lead toward superhuman
AI compared to China. This could encourage more investment in safety, because minor
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
6/17

slowdowns would no longer seem to carry as sharp of a risk of losing an arms race. To date,
no one has drafted a bill or regulation to allow for more visas for this purpose, let alone
lobbied Congress or USCIS to adopt it.
You can help by figuring out which specific kinds of people need to be welcomed into the
country, what kinds of visas they would need to be eligible for, who could grant those visas,
what program or authority they could be granted under, and who should be in charge of
making this happen. Ideally, those conclusions would then be written up as a proposal for
an appropriate officer at the State Department and/or the Department of Homeland
Security. You might also write to an appropriate official at the White House who works on
immigration policy. 
Because the current administration is relatively skeptical of immigrants, it will be
important to narrowly tailor the visa reform to cover only the people who we need to have
here in America in order to widen our AI tech lead against rivals like China. It would also be
helpful to include policies that will reduce the risk that people admitted under the new
program will conduct espionage or otherwise transfer tech to rival countries.
Insurance Requirements
A team of researchers led by the AI Objectives Institute recently put out a paper praising
the benefits of AI safety insurance, arguing persuasively that “insurance has the potential
to create a more favorable incentive structure by making practices such as safety-washing
or underestimating AI-related risks less appealing.” CAIP’s co-founder, Thomas Larsen,
was a strong proponent of requiring frontier AI developers to carry a minimum amount of
insurance.
However, we never satisfactorily answered the question of what this minimum amount
should be. What are a reasonable set of policy limits? How large can the deductible be? How
large can co-insurance payments be? What is the scope of harms that would be covered by
such policies, and what if any exclusions would be permitted? What kinds of re-insurance
requirements would insurers have to meet to make sure that policies will be paid out even
if the primary insurer is bankrupted by an unusually large claim?
You can help by researching best practices in the insurance industry and using what you
learn to answer some or all of these questions, and then drafting a sample insurance policy,
or a bill that would require AI developers to place insurance, or both. You could also try
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
7/17

sending the sample insurance policy to a real insurance company or to an actuary and
seeing if they’d be willing to come up with a price estimate for it.
Public Grant Funding
The US federal government currently distributes half a billion dollars a year in AI research
funding; some of this funding could be explicitly earmarked for AI safety. There was a $20
million allocation for safety research in 2023, but since then, no one has drafted a proposal
for more such earmarks, let alone lobbied Congress or the National Science Foundation to
adopt it.
You can help by figuring out how much money could usefully be absorbed by technical AI
safety researchers over a variety of different timelines (e.g. 1 year, 2 years, 5 years, etc.),
what kinds of programs they might work on, how these programs could be made legible to
policymakers who have only a general interest in the topic (i.e., talk mostly about
interpretability and reliability, not microdooms and superintelligence explosions), and how
we might measure the success of such grants to avoid wasting money.
Global Crisis Hotline
Lawfare and Brookings published a thoughtful piece in 2024 calling for an “AI incidents
hotline,” similar to the legendary Red Phone that symbolized efforts to connect the US and
the USSR to avert nuclear accidents during the Cold War.
There are a number of interesting questions that always need to be answered about such a
hotline: who should staff it? What authority should they have? What kinds of incidents
should the hotline be used for? What actions will the operators take when a major crisis is
reported, and to whom will they delegate less critical emergencies in order to keep the line
clear? What, if anything, can the US constructively do if China refuses to pick up the phone
during a particular crisis?
The US currently seems to lack even a basic bilateral military hotline with China, so adding
an AI-specific hotline will take a significant amount of work. If we do, we will also have to
address a few AI-specific concern, such as: how will operators identify deepfakes or rogue
AIs that are mis-using the system? How will the hotline be hardened against jamming or
automated cyber-attacks?
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
8/17

To the best of my knowledge, nobody has laid out a detailed plan for how to create an
appropriate international incident hotline, let alone proposed a treaty or other document
that would cause one to come into being. You can help by researching how past hotlines
have worked and what we can learn from their successes and failures, and then using what
you learn to propose a specific plan to launch a new hotline.
Compute Monitoring
There has been much discussion of how the government could attempt to track large
clusters of computing power with the goal of knowing who is doing large-scale training
runs so that the government could intervene in an emergency. Yonadav Shavit’s 2023
paper “What Does It Take to Catch a Chinchilla?” provides a useful amount of detail about
how often inspections would need to take place, but there is still much work to be done in
terms of figuring out who would do these inspections, what the penalties would be for
noncompliance, and how the hardware innovations required would be paid for. 
To date, there has been only limited legislative action on this topic. Senator Cotton has
recently introduced the Chip Security Act, which would require export-controlled chips to
have a location verification mechanism within 6 months of the bill’s passage, and CAIP has
sincerely endorsed it, but it’s not totally clear how the location verification would work or
what else might need to be done to monitor compute. 
There are many details that remain to be worked out in terms of what specific hardware
features could and should be placed on chips to make them easier for the government to
monitor. Should advanced AI chips have GPS locators? Should they include proof-of-work
features that allow others to identify what types of computations they were used on and
roughly how many of those computations were performed? Should chips have a ‘kill
switch’ that allows them to be remotely deactivated, or, more aggressively, a dead man’s
switch that automatically deactivates them if they do not receive the correct password at
periodic intervals?
How much would it cost to develop each of these features, and how quickly could they be
developed and manufactured? There are several academic papers that discuss these
features in the abstract, but I am not aware of any that provide concrete estimates of time
and cost. You can help by doing research that narrows down the range of plausible
estimates.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
9/17

LAWS Boycott
Groups of AI researchers have occasionally banded together to oppose the development of
lethal autonomous weapons systems (“LAWS”), but there is no national or global policy
that specifically bans such weapons, and weapons that are at least semi-autonomous
continue to be manufactured and deployed (e.g., in Ukraine). 
Section 1638 of the FY2025 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) included a
statement that “it is the policy of the United States” to avoid letting AI compromise “the
principle of requiring positive human actions” before firing nuclear weapons, but this falls
slightly short of a binding legal requirement to always keep a human in the loop even for
nuclear weapons, and conventional LAWS remain unregulated. 
Although at least 30 countries have called for a ban on LAWS, it seems that none of them
have actually written the text of a proposed treaty or a proposed new protocol to the
Convention on Conventional Weapons that would create a legally-enforceable ban (for
countries that sign it) on the use of LAWS. You can help by doing that work for them.
Similarly, to date, no one has written a specific policy that would make it illegal for the US
military to use some or all types of LAWS – you can help by figuring out which types of
LAWS would be most practical to do without and writing a policy that would require that
we avoid their use. Stuart Russell has suggested that lethal autonomous weapons below
400 grams could be banned, as part of an effort to avoid the worst kinds of anti-personnel
swarms while still allowing for LAWS that can destroy, e.g., enemy tanks and fighter
planes. However, it’s not obvious that the 400-gram figure is technically accurate; it seems
to have been imported from the St. Petersburg Declaration of 1868, which dealt with
exploding musket balls. It might be perfectly possible to design anti-personnel LAWS that
weigh only 300 grams. You can help by updating this standard and coming up with a more
technically justified red line for lethal autonomous weapon systems. 
It could also be helpful to try to organize a consumer boycott against companies that are
designing or manufacturing LAWS, or against companies that are doing so without
adequate safeguards, or against companies that are designing specific LAWS such as anti-
personnel swarms. You could help with this type of effort by making a list of which
companies are leading these efforts and what commonly available consumer products they
make and which convenient substitute products are made by companies that aren't
involved in designing LAWS.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
10/17

Industry Standards
NIST has already published an AI Risk Management Framework that contains voluntary
best practices for coping with the risks of AI. It is not obvious that all major AI developers
are actually complying with these voluntary best practices, or even that they have
promised to do so. There is much work to be done lobbying companies to publicly promise
to abide by the NIST AI RMF and then preparing checklists, scorecards and other tools to
evaluate how well they are living up to this promise. 
SaferAI’s work in creating a rating system for AI companies is a good first step, but the
ratings need to be broadened and aligned with the NIST criteria, and someone needs to
convince the companies to commit to using these criteria and to publishing enough data
often enough that third parties can meaningfully assess the extent to which they are
successfully complying with those criteria.
You can help by developing checklists or scorecards that assess compliance, by developing
tools, wizards, charts, and templates that make it easier for companies to comply, and by
drafting sample agreements that companies could sign to show that they agree to follow
these guidelines.
Structured Access to Research
Researchers need access to AI models in order to assess their safety, but corporations may
be reluctant to share their source code for fear of losing a competitive advantage, and
publicly sharing source code may be undesirable in any case because it may accelerate
general AI capabilities research. To solve this problem, some companies are offering
“structured access” to their models through an API. 
However, it is not clear that anyone is lobbying for this trend to continue or for other
companies to adopt structured access plans. You can help by defining the minimum class
of researchers who should have structured access, the minimum amount of access that
they should have, and the maximum amount of usage restrictions or other requirements
that companies can impose on such researchers. For example, a non-disparagement
agreement would largely defeat the purpose of such access; if OpenAI can require that a
researcher not say anything disapproving about its products as a condition of getting early
access to its models, then the early review no longer serves as a reliable signal of whether
the models are safe.
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
11/17

Once we know more about what a reasonable structured access plan would look like, you
can help by drafting an open letter that companies can sign to pledge that they will always
provide this access, and then sending that letter to appropriate departments at AI
developers and encouraging them to sign it.
CONCLUSION
All of the topics above need more people who are working on drafting concrete policy
proposals and lobbying governments and corporations to implement those proposals. I am
not aware of any AI safety issues that are “saturated” with drafters or lobbyists, in the
sense that they already have about as many drafters as they need and adding more staff
would face diminishing marginal returns. 
By contrast, the movement as a whole is already saturated with general policy ideas, in the
sense that we have far more good policy ideas than we can currently hope to act on. In
addition to the eleven ideas discussed in this post, there are many more good ideas
summarized at the bullet-point level in response to OSTP’s call for comments on its AI
Action Plan. You can sift through the 10,068 official comments here, or you can read CAIP’s
highlights in issues #67 and #73 of our weekly newsletter. 
What this means is that if you’re spending your time generating even more policy ideas,
that’s not likely to be helpful – unless your new idea is much better than existing ideas,
and that improvement is obvious and visible to the handful of advocates who are trying to
get those ideas implemented, then it’s profoundly unclear how your new idea is going to
translate into real-world change.
If you’re spending your time musing about general considerations that might possibly
improve the quality of other general policy ideas that other people might come up with
someday, that’s even less likely to be helpful.
I have to imagine that even the researchers themselves don’t want to see their research go
to waste. If you dedicate your professional career to seeking out new knowledge, don’t you
want someone to benefit from that knowledge? Don’t you want someone to,
metaphorically speaking, read your thesis or your dissertation?
If you do, then I urge you to adopt one or two of the projects discussed in this post and help
move that project forward toward being a concrete policy idea that’s ready for
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
12/17

policymakers to adopt. I truly believe this will be useful on the margins.
If we want to change things at scale, and not just on the margins, then the only way I can
think of to make sure that most of the research we produce actually gets read by the people
in charge is to shift some of our funding from research to advocacy. In my sixth and
seventh posts, I’ll explain what institutional changes I think would need to happen within
the AI safety funding environment to make that possible.
Mentioned in
122
Next:
Political Funding Expertise (Post 6
of 7 on AI Governance)
1 comments
37 karma
Previous:
Shift Resources to Advocacy Now
(Post 4 of 7 on AI Governance)
5 comments
63 karma
Log in to save where you left off
Comments 3
Sorted by New & upvoted
Chris Leong
2
0
9
Great post. Listing concrete examples of orphaned policies makes it much easier for folks to evaluate
how much of a priority drafting orphaned policies should be.
That said, my belief is that actually it's not just fine for the AI governance community to propose far
more policies than policies actually drafted, but this is exactly the way that it should be.
Generally, when you have a pipeline, you want filtering to occur at each stage. I have a strong
intuition that the impact of policies is quite heavy-tailed, particularly because some policies that
initially seem promising might actually turn out to be net-negative, impractical or hard to have any
confidence in.
The Center for AI Policy Has Shut Down
11mo
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
13/17

Here's my hot-takes (disclaimer: by hot-takes, I really do mean hot-takes and I'm not a policy
professional!)
• Windfalls clause: robustly good, but not on the critical path
• Antitrust waiver: seems robustly good
• Visa reform: hard to determine the sign of due to espionage concerns
• Insurance requirements: hard to determine the sign of due to moral hazard
• Public grant funding: quite hard to make sure this goes to anything useful, that said, UK AISI is
distributing grants and I'm quite optimistic about their judgement
• Global crisis hotline: seems robustly good
• Compute monitoring: seems robustly good
• LAW Boycott: hard to determine sign due to unstable equilibrium
• Industry standards: I'm a lot more pessimistic about this than most folks. Very easy for this to create
a false sense of security. Unfortunately, at the end of the day, if a company doesn't care, they don't
care
• Structured access to research: I suspect that the companies will either give it voluntarily or it'll not
be worth the political capital to try to mandate
So 3/11 seem robustly good, with another robustly good but not on the critical path.
Question: Are there any organisations focused on taking general policy proposals and developing
them into specific proposals for legislation? I could see value in having an organising specialising in
this stage if the majority of governance organisations are just throwing rather general proposals over
the wall and hoping someone else will fill in the details.
Jason Green-Lowe
2
0
10
I'm not aware of any such organizations! This is an example of one of the 'holes' that I'm trying to
highlight in our ecosystem. 
We have so many people proposing and discussing general ideas, but there's no process in place to
rigorously compare those ideas to each other, choose a few of those ideas to move forward, write
up legislation for the ideas that are selected, and advertise that legislation to policymakers.
I don't object to the community proposing 5-10x more ideas than it formally writes up as policies; as
you say, some filtering is appropriate. I do object to the community spending 5-10x more time
proposing ideas than it spends on drafting them. The reason why it makes sense to have lots of
ideas is that proposing an idea is (or should be) quick and easy compared to the hard work of
drafting it into an actual policy document. If we spend 70% of our resources on general academic
discussion of ideas without anyone ever making a deliberate effort to select and promote one or two
of those ideas for legislative advocacy, then something's gone badly wrong.
SummaryBot
0
0
2
11mo
11mo
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
14/17

Executive summary: This post argues that the AI governance field suffers from a surplus of abstract
research and a shortage of advocacy, leading to a backlog of promising but unused policy ideas
(“orphaned policies”); to remedy this, the author recommends that researchers make their work more
actionable by drafting concrete policy documents and adopting one of eleven specific,
underdeveloped proposals detailed in the post.
Key points:
1. Advocacy bottleneck: The field has a researcher-to-advocate imbalance (~3:1), meaning many
good AI policy ideas lack champions who can bring them to policymakers—creating a large
backlog of “orphaned” proposals.
2. Drafting real policies is tractable and impactful: Researchers should draft actual legislative or
governance documents, which are often shorter and more influential than academic papers,
and easier for policymakers to act on.
3. Make white papers concrete and directive: Even without drafting full legislation, researchers
can increase their work’s utility by including specific recommendations, estimates, and
implementation details.
4. Legal and funding constraints are navigable: Despite 501(c)(3) limits on lobbying, researchers
can still advocate specific policies if framed as nonpartisan analysis with a clear evidentiary
basis.
5. Catalog of eleven underdeveloped ideas: The post outlines eleven “orphaned” policies—
ranging from compute monitoring and AI insurance to visa reform and LAWS regulation—each
with specific missing components that a researcher could fill in.
6. Call to action and teaser for next post: The author urges researchers to “adopt” a policy and
help develop it for real-world use, and suggests broader institutional reforms (to be discussed
in the final post) are needed to shift funding from research to advocacy.
This comment was auto-generated by the EA Forum Team. Feel free to point out issues with this
summary by replying to the comment, and contact us if you have feedback.
More from Jason Green-Lowe
141
· 1y ago · 40m read
25
Jason Green-Lowe
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance)
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
15/17

View more
Curated and popular this week
Impact Requires Implementation: What Dispensers for Safe Water Scale-Back Can Teach
Us About Monitoring
 · 13d ago · 17m read  · 
3
The AI people have been right a lot
 · 4d ago · 7m read  · 
11
In Development Magazine Launch
 · 4d ago · 1m read  · 
4
Recent opportunities in AI safety
63
· 11mo ago · 38m read
5
Jason Green-Lowe
61
· 1y ago · 16m read
0
Jason Green-Lowe
Tony Senanayake
TL;DR Between 2022 and 2023, GiveWell and Open Philanthropy committed over $70 million to
Evidence Action’s Dispensers for Safe Water programme. An independent survey in 2025 found that in
Uganda and Malawi the programme was reaching approximately 70% fewer people with detectable…
Dylan Matthews
This post was crossposted from Dylan Matthew's blog by the EA Forum
team. The author may not see or reply to comments. ----------------------
------------------ Subtitle: Try to keep an open mind as the world gets…
Lauren Gilbert
We're announcing a new development magazine: In Development. Our goal is to promote discourse on
development without dogma. In other words, we public stories doing deep dives into pressing
development issues, backed up by evidence, argument, and experience. The first piece is by Paul…
148
· 8d ago · 9m read
16
Sophie Kim
19
· 3d ago · 26m read
7
Uladzislau Linnik, Enisa Ismaili
Shift Resources to Advocacy Now (Post 4 of 7 on AI Governance)
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance)
The Anthropic IPO Is Coming. We Aren't Ready for It.
AI safety is maturing. Is its generalist talent pipeline keeping up?
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
16/17

View more
10
· 15d ago · 1m read
0
Kamil Alaa
AIxBio Hackathon - April 24-26, $4,000 in prizes (online + SF + Berlin)
We and our partners use cookies, including to review how our site is used
and to improve our site's performance. By clicking "Accept all" you agree to
their use. Customise your cookie settings for more control, or review our
cookie policy here.
4/20/26, 10:12 PM
Orphaned Policies (Post 5 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/MgJchZpSmGozmDzs8
17/17
