AN ACTIVIST VIEW OF AI GOVERNANCE
AI safety
Effective giving
Existential risk
AI governance
Coefficient Giving
Frontpage
Show all topics
Previously in this sequence, I estimated that we have 3 researchers for every advocate
working on US AI governance, and I argued that this ratio is backwards – we need the
political power provided by advocates to have a chance of preventing misaligned
superintelligence. A few researchers might be useful as a ‘multiplier effect’ on the power of
many advocates, but the converse is not true: there’s no “magic bullet” that AI governance
researchers can hope to discover that could substitute for an army of political foot soldiers.
Even the best political ideas still need many political activists to spread them, because the
political arena is noisy and contested. 
Unfortunately, we have very few political activists. This means the good ideas that our
governance researchers have been proposing are mostly “orphaned.” In other words, these
good ideas have no one to draft them into shovel-ready language that legislators could
approve, and they have no one to advocate for their passage.
It’s a bit of a puzzle that the AI safety movement nevertheless continues to fund so much
academic-style research. Why do we need more good ideas if we already have a dozen good
ideas that nobody is acting on?
In the sixth post in this sequence, I suggested that part of the answer to this puzzle is that
we have 4 academic-style thinkers for every political advocate on our AI safety grant-
making teams. Because the culture within these grantmaking teams is heavily tilted
toward research, grantmakers may feel more comfortable funding research grants or may
be better able to appreciate the merits of research grants. They may also have a warm
collegial relationship with some of the researchers, which could subtly bias their funding
decisions.
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7
of 7 on AI Governance)
by Jason Green-Lowe
Jun 22 2025
53
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
1/32

Ideally, these kinds of biases would be caught and corrected by formal grantmaking
procedures, such as the use of written scoring rubrics. Unfortunately, such procedures are
notably missing from major AI safety funders. A week before publishing this post, I gave
an advance copy of it to the five largest institutional donors so that they could address any
factual errors. Although several people offered helpful corrections, none of these
corrections change my fundamental point: AI safety funders are evaluating grants using
an informal and subjective method. No formal criteria are being applied to most AI
governance grant applications.
In this seventh and final post, I explain why these formal grantmaking procedures are
helpful, why they are not used by AI safety funders, and how this can be fixed.
AI SAFETY GRANTMAKERS HAVE VERY
LITTLE MAINSTREAM GRANTMAKING
EXPERIENCE
The Effective Altruist Bubble
Most of the people who are running AI safety grantmaking teams have significant
grantmaking experience – but essentially all of that experience is from inside the effective
altruist (EA) bubble. A typical career might involve doing AI safety research for a couple of
years, then doing some EA field-building or running a small EA organization, then
working as an EA grantmaker, and finally managing an EA grantmaking team. It’s
reasonable to promote most of our leaders from within our own movement, but we’ve gone
beyond that and cultivated an extremely insular bubble. At no point has any AI safety
grantmaker ever worked as a grantmaker at any traditional philanthropy to see how those
organizations make decisions about awarding and managing grants. We’re not just talking
about a general tendency to prefer internal candidates – we’re talking about a level of
detachment from the mainstream philanthropic world that is likely to result in profound
ignorance about mainstream practices and techniques.
You might wonder what we have to learn from traditional philanthropies. Part of the
premise of effective altruism is that it’s possible to do much better than traditional
philanthropies by using utilitarian philosophy and rigorous quantitative reasoning:
because effective altruists think hard about what it means to do good and how to measure
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
2/32

that, we really do select better cause areas than traditional philanthropies. I firmly approve
of the way the EA movement prioritizes, e.g., shrimp welfare over adopting puppies, or
prioritizes curing malaria over supporting victims of breast cancer. I would not want to
undercut any of the types of reasoning that underlie these broader strategic decisions.
However, just because the EA movement is better than mainstream philanthropies at
selecting which broad cause areas to support doesn’t mean that everything that traditional
philanthropies do is wrong or pointless. In particular, traditional philanthropies have well-
developed techniques for selecting which individual grants to fund within a cause area, and
(as I will argue throughout this post) these techniques are often much better than the
comparable techniques used by EA grantmakers. Thus, rather than trying to reinvent the
entire field from scratch, we should be able to learn from mainstream philanthropy’s
experiences and import some of their best practices when these practices are better than
ours.
I conducted a quick census of the AI safety grantmaking staff at the five major
institutional funders (Open Philanthropy, Longview, Macroscopic, LTFF, and SFF) based on
their LinkedIn profiles and institutional bios. As in my previous post, I have lightly
anonymized these staff by offloading their individual descriptions into a separate Google
Doc and referring to them as “Person 1” and “Person 2,” rather than directly using their
real names. If you want to see who they are, you can just click on the relevant hyperlinks,
but my purpose here is to point out a deficit in the overall bank of skills held by the
movement as a whole, not to criticize individual staff.
Unfortunately, as you can see from my census, there are only a few examples of people
working on AI safety grantmaking who have any non-EA philanthropic experience at all.
None of this experience appears to be related to grantmaking.
We have one person who worked for a decade as a mainstream Chief Development Officer,
where she most likely would have focused heavily on raising new funds (as opposed to
figuring out how to spend those funds wisely). We have three people who each have a few
years of experience working as team leads or front-line staff at mainstream nonprofits –
this would teach them about what charities need and about how to fill out grant
applications, but not necessarily about how to design or evaluate grant applications.
Finally, we have two people who briefly worked in roles at mainstream charities that seem
unrelated to grantmaking.
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
3/32

That was all the non-EA grantmaking experience on AI safety grantmaking teams that I
could find. To the best of my knowledge, everyone else at Open Philanthropy, Longview
Philanthropy, Macroscopic Ventures, the Long-Term Future Fund, and the Survival and
Flourishing Fund either has grantmaking experience from solely within the EA bubble, or
has no previous grantmaking experience at all, or works on grantmaking for other cause
areas besides AI safety.
If I’ve missed someone with relevant experience, please let me know, and I’ll be happy to
add them. Otherwise, I am forced to conclude that there is essentially zero mainstream
grantmaking experience among AI safety grantmakers. 
Ineffective Bootstrapping
Most of the techniques that AI safety grantmakers are applying to evaluate the quality of
grant applications are therefore likely to be techniques that they invented themselves or
that they learned from each other as they worked their way up the ranks of EA-affiliated
philanthropies. 
These techniques are very unlikely to be adequate.
In most cause areas, we would be able to “bootstrap” up from a very thin knowledge base
by seeing which grantmakers were funding grants that tended to succeed. For example, if
you’re trying to fund malaria eradication, you can look and see what happened to malaria
rates among the populations served by the grants you funded. Over time, you’ll build up a
reasonably clear picture of which grants were most successful, which will in turn allow you
to identify which grantmaking techniques were most successful. Thus, even if your team
starts out without knowing much about proper grantmaking procedure, your team could
gradually converge on some of the best grantmaking practices through trial and error.
However, in the field of AI governance, it is impossible to do a significant amount of
bootstrapping, because we get very limited real-world feedback, and because we have a
vague and unclear theory of change.
AI governance provides very limited feedback because much of the “outcome” of AI
governance work is long-term, speculative, and binary. To put it bluntly, either we will
wind up in a future where there is an AI apocalypse, or we will not – and we will not
necessarily observe which future we are in until it is too late to meaningfully change our
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
4/32

grantmaking decisions. Unlike malaria, misaligned superintelligence is not a problem that
claims one victim at a time. 
As a result, we should not expect to get much objective data about which AI governance
grants were most successful. We should especially not expect to get this data with a casual
or incidental effort – if we want meaningful data about which governance programs are
succeeding, then we’ll need to carefully identify reasonable proxies for success and then
make a special effort to measure those proxies. As I will argue later in this post, it does not
appear that this work has been accomplished. Because we do not know much about which
governance projects have been most successful, our grantmaking teams will not have been
able to learn much about which grantmaking techniques were most successful. 
Suppose you apply a particular flavor of grantmaking to fund my AI governance research
paper. Your methods lead you to be very confident that my research paper is worth
funding. Later, you want to find out whether my research paper was successful so you can
decide whether the methods you used led you to make an accurate prediction about the
value of my grant.
What would it even mean to decide that my governance paper was “successful?” It is not
clear what (if any) theory of change can be applied to the paper. You can perhaps observe
whether I published a governance paper, whether other researchers agreed that the paper
seemed insightful, or whether I had many citations, but none of these metrics are very
well-correlated with how much (if at all) the paper helped save the world. It’s profoundly
unclear who is supposed to be reading these academic-style papers, why they will behave
differently as a result of reading them, and why those behavioral changes will reduce the
risk of an AI catastrophe. Not only are we not measuring any quantitative data about such
papers – we don’t even have a good explanation for why or how we should expect such
papers to be helpful.
As a result, there’s simply no viable feedback loop for AI safety grantmakers. Most AI
grantmakers are very diligent, thoughtful people, but no matter how diligent you are, you
can’t improve your skills through deliberate practice unless you’re given access to some
kind of data about how well you’ve been succeeding, and in the AI governance field, that
data mostly hasn’t been available.
Therefore, our movement has a staff of professional grantmakers who were not taught
how to manage a grantmaking program by mainstream philanthropies, and who are
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
5/32

unlikely to have learned much about that task based on their years of experience within
the EA bubble.
HOW GRANTMAKING IS SUPPOSED TO
WORK
 The main reason why the AI safety funders’ lack of non-EA grantmaking experience
matters is that it tends to create excessively informal grant evaluations that are more likely
to lead to suboptimal decisions. To explain what I mean by this, I want to first lay out how
professional grantmaking is supposed to work and then lay out what my experience has
been with grantmaking in the AI safety field.
The Core Process for Traditional Grantmaking
The core process for professional grantmaking consists of the following steps, in
approximately this order:
1. A funder settles on a budget and timeline for achieving a particular goal.
2. The funder communicates their goals, budget, and timeline to potential grantees so
that they can prepare to apply for funding.
3. The funder decides how grant applications will be evaluated and explains this
process to potential grantees so that they know what kinds of grants to apply for.
4. The funder collects and evaluates grant applications based on the process.
5. The funder notifies all applicants about the decisions that were made on their grants
and the reasons for those decisions.
This is the process that I used for five years at HomeBase, which refereed grant application
processes every year for homelessness services at each of about 30 different counties
spread across the US Pacific region. Nobody saw the basic steps of this process as overly
fussy or unnecessary – on the contrary, participants used to badger us to release
information about each of the five steps as soon as possible. People would drive for an hour
to come to our briefings, because they wanted to find out how they could earn a grant and
how they could keep it.
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
6/32

As part of this process, we always had a written rubric that we used to assign numerical
scores to each grant application. An example of this kind of work can be seen starting on
page 22 of this handbook. To the maximum extent possible, we tied scoring factors to
measurable quantitative outcomes – for example, a rapid rehousing program could get up
to 3 points for enrolling its clients in health insurance, up to 8 points for providing at least
as many apartments as they pledged to provide, up to 2 points for helping clients increase
their income, and so on. The larger the percentage of clients who get their health
insurance, the larger the share of the 3 points for health insurance you could claim. We
took the mystery out of funding; for the most part, you could look at your own
performance and figure out whether you would be eligible to have your funding renewed.
When it wasn’t possible to use quantitative estimates, we described the qualitative
outcomes we were looking for in great detail, breaking these outcomes down into multiple
subparts and awarding a specific number of points for satisfying each subpart. We then
recruited a panel of independent judges to determine which subparts had been satisfied,
and we averaged their ratings.
The resulting final scores were used to rank all of the grant applications in order, and then
those applications’ scores were made public so that everyone could see which applications
were funded and why.
This procedure was required by federal law, but the level of transparency and rigor we
offered was seen as typical in our industry, including by people coming from state and
local government, churches, hospitals, and private foundations.
For example, Chris Kabel, a senior program officer at the Northwest Health Foundation,
which manages $68 million in grants, writes that his organization hosts “a grantee forum
where we invite anybody who is interested in applying for a particular program to learn
about what the program is trying to achieve and what we’re hoping to see in competitive
proposals. We also answer questions they have that are relevant to their particular
programs or initiatives. I’d say almost all of our grantees probably already know how they
fit into our program’s goals and strategies by the time they get a grant from us.”
Here's a similar quote from Anne Warhover, the CEO of the Colorado Health Foundation,
which manages $1 billion in assets. “Everybody has to be accountable in this world. We
start  by thinking about who is our customer, who is our stakeholder, to whom do we owe
our accountability, and that is the people of Colorado. This isn’t our money. This is their
money. And so how can you possibly be accountable without showing results and having
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
7/32

some objectivity to your results? You can’t just fling your money in all different directions
and hope that some of it sticks. You have got to have strategies that will help you get to
those results.”
Likewise, Ken Thompson, a program officer at the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, writes
that “the single most helpful thing you can do to make the reporting process useful to
everybody is to be clear up front about what the project intends to accomplish. The other
thing that is particularly helpful for grantees is to identify a set of reasonable goals to
measure.”
For some more examples of how foundations put this kind of grantmaking technique into
practice, you can check out the scoring rubrics provided by:
The Rising Foundation
Ability Central
The Tallmadge Foundation
The John & Deborah Gillis Foundation
The Gates Foundation – RISE Education Fund
Advantages of Using Formal Rubrics
These rubrics have two important features: (1) they assign a specific number of points to
specific criteria, and (2) they explicitly say what is necessary to earn points in each
category. Together, these features make it much more likely that grants will be awarded
based on the foundation’s true values. It is still possible for an evaluator to ‘cheat’ and
assign a project an artificially high score simply because they like it, but doing so will
require explicitly lying about whether it meets the written criteria. Most people who are
altruistic enough to work at a nonprofit find this kind of explicit lying very distasteful and
will usually avoid it.
Obviously, effective altruists can and should object to some of the specific goals being
pursued by these grantmakers – grants to rural American schools or to fund career
development for people with disabilities are honorable causes, but they are probably not
reasonable choices if you are trying to do the most good per dollar. Effective altruists
might also object to some of the specific criteria used in these rubrics, or at least to their
weighting – for example, if I were writing the rubric for Ability Central, I would not award
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
8/32

five times more points for having “people with disabilities in leadership” than for having a
clear “needs assessment” that shows why the grantee’s project is necessary.
However, the process used by these mainstream philanthropies is absolutely vital, because
it forces grantors to make decisions about which criteria are most important to them and
to communicate those decisions to prospective grantees. I can criticize Ability Central’s
grantmaking criteria and try to improve them because those criteria are written down. If
Ability Central had instead used an informal evaluation process that allowed their staff to
recommend whichever grants seem best to them, then nobody would be able to tell that,
e.g., Ability Central was missing out on opportunities to do more good because they were
paying too much attention to the identities of their grantees’ leaders. 
Thus, even though Open Philanthropy’s substantive goals are better than Ability Central’s
goals, Ability Central’s grant evaluation procedures are better than Open Philanthropy’s
procedures.
If you haven’t written down the criteria that you’re using to evaluate grant applications,
then nobody (not even you) can be sure that you’re funding the projects that best support
your mission. You might instead be funding whatever projects subjectively appeal to your
grantmaking staff for reasons that you would not reflectively endorse. As Luke
Muehlhauser of Open Philanthropy wrote in 2011, “Cognitive science shows us that
humans just are a collection of messy little modules like anger and fear and the modules
that produce confirmation bias. We have a few modules for processing logic and
probability and rational goal-pursuit, but they are slow and energy-expensive and rarely
used…our brains avoid using these expensive modules whenever possible.”
If you allow grantmakers to make subjective personal decisions about which grants to
fund without a formal process that forces them to connect their decisions to community-
approved criteria, then at least some of the time, some of their brains will slip into cheaper
processing modes that default to whatever conclusions feel comfortable – that’s just how
humans work.
Clarity vs. Rigidity
It’s not necessary for these grantmaking criteria to be utterly rigid – if there’s a good reason to
make an exception to your criteria, then you can and should allow a grantmaker to write
up a defense of why they are making an exception. 
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
9/32

In other words, my proposal is not that donors should mechanically total up a list of points
and then feel bound by the outcome. Rather, my proposal is that donors should go through
the exercise of specifying concrete goals, assigning weights to those goals, and then
totaling up the resulting points in order to (1) get clear in their own minds about what
types of achievements are most important, and (2) make sure that they are not accidentally
allowing themselves to place too much weight on criteria that are less objectively
important. 
If, after totaling up the points and taking the time to write up an explanation of why the
points are misleading for a particular grant, a donor remains convinced that the points
lead to an incorrect recommendation, then the donor should ignore the points and act on
what they believe to be the correct recommendation.
However, if you don’t even insist that people explain how their decisions relate to their
principles, then much of the time, their decisions won’t relate very closely to their
principles, and as a result those decisions will predictably do less good.
HOW GRANTMAKING WORKS IN AI SAFETY
This seems to be what is happening in the AI Safety grantmaking space – there is no
process that would require grantmakers to connect their decisions to their principles, and
as a result, grantmakers are often making deeply suboptimal funding decisions.
Blundering in the Dark
I attended a talk at Less Online this year where Lydia Nottingham attempted to create
“GiveWell for AI safety,” asking participants “how might we estimate the cost-effectiveness
of marginal donations in AI safety?” The session was fruitful in that we considered various
alternative metrics and had a thoughtful discussion of their pros and cons. Should we
measure the number of citations to a research paper funded by a grant? Which citations
matter? Can they be weighted appropriately? How should an academic citation be weighed
against a citation in popular media?
In one sense, this was a very interesting discussion. In another sense, it was absolutely
outrageous that amateurs could be having such a conversation for an hour on end without
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
10/32

anyone stopping and saying, “Wait a minute; this has all been worked out already by the
professionals; here are the metrics they use and here’s why they use them!”
Hundreds of millions of dollars have already been allocated to AI safety projects. What was
the basis of those allocations? The horrifying answer is that there is no such basis – or, at
least, no basis that grantees are allowed to see.
How many pieces of legislation does Open Philanthropy think CAIP should have been able
to edit for $2 million? How many citations in earned media do they think we should have
had? How many times do they think we should have met with Congressional officials?
What kind of language do they think those officials should be using when they talk about
CAIP or about AI safety? If these aren’t the correct metrics, then what are the correct
metrics?
I did not have this information when I set out to build up CAIP and started making new
hires, and I still don’t have this information today, and that’s ridiculous. If I had known
exactly what our donors’ expectations were in 2023, there’s a good chance that I would
have turned down the work and said, “I’m sorry, but I can’t achieve those results on the
budget you’re offering.” That would have saved the movement quite a bit of money.
Alternatively, perhaps I would have been able to refocus our work so as to actually achieve
the goals, thereby generating a lot of value for the movement. Instead, I was left to blunder
in the dark.
A Note on Goodhart’s Law
One grantmaker I spoke with defended this ambiguity by noting the potential that explicit
performance targets could be abused by self-interested grantees. He is concerned that if,
e.g., advocacy groups are scored based on the number of Congressional meetings they
attend, then groups might, e.g., artificially increase their apparent performance by
scheduling hundreds of low-quality meetings with less relevant Congressional staffers.
In my opinion, this conflates the bare possibility that Goodhart’s Law might have some
effect on AI safety advocates (which is true) with the conclusion that Goodhart’s Law
applies so strongly as to render it infeasible to have any formal performance criteria at all
(which seems false). 
To continue the example from above, if you are worried about advocates having too many
low-quality meetings, then you can add a scoring factor that evaluates the quality of the
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
11/32

meetings. You can carry on adding as many factors as seems necessary until your scoring
factors collectively arrive at a reasonable approximation of the thing you are trying to
measure.
Bureaucracies engage in formal, multi-part evaluations all the time, not all of which are
completely pointless or corrupted. Nobody suggests that, e.g., food safety inspectors are
creating an artificial set of incentives for restaurants to sweep their floors, wash their
dishes, and throw out expired food, even if these tasks are on a checklist that is distributed
to restaurant owners in advance. The reason why these tasks are on the checklist is that
they really do increase food safety, and there is no cheap and easy way for most restaurants
to appear to have completed these tasks without actually completing these tasks. Similarly,
when I was evaluating the performance of homeless shelters, I both checked to see how
many people were sleeping in beds, and to make sure that those beds were clean and
adequately sized and made of appropriate materials. If a shelter somehow found a way to
increase the number of people who were sleeping indoors on appropriate beds, that would
genuinely reflect well on the shelter.
For the most part, there’s no reasonable way to cheat on a well-designed grant evaluation
process. If you find yourself suffering badly from Goodhart’s Law, that’s usually a sign that
you’re not investing enough time or enough talent in designing the formal rubric. For
instance, if you’re handing out a billion-dollar grant, then you shouldn’t expect a one-page
checklist to adequately constrain the grantees; for that much money, even well-intentioned
people will often fall prey to corrupt incentives to find extremely clever ways to optimize
for satisfying the formal criteria. However, if you’ve got a million-dollar grant backed up
by a five-page rubric, then it’s usually not worth a grantee’s time to try to artificially inflate
their results. This is especially true when the grantmakers ultimately remain free to use
their judgment to overrule the formal results of a rubric.
As a result, I think it is very ill-advised to deliberately obscure the grantmaking process as
part of an effort to prevent artificial optimization. Grantmakers need to be very clear in
their own minds about what they’re trying to fund and why so that they can make optimal
decisions, and grantees also need to know what kinds of grants will be funded, so that they
can make responsible long-term plans and focus their efforts on activities that the
community is willing to support. The problems that are currently being caused by a lack of
clarity in these areas are far more severe than any minor difficulties that might arise based
on Goodhart’s Law.
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
12/32

Open Philanthropy’s Evaluation
To illustrate what I mean by a lack of clarity, I am sharing a full copy of the final email that
I received from Open Philanthropy regarding their evaluation of CAIP. I have other
communications from them, but none of them are substantially more detailed. There is no
appendix or similar document that unpacks their reasoning. 
The point of this example is solely to illustrate the vagueness of AI safety grantmaking
evaluations. Even if you happen to agree with all of Open Philanthropy’s conclusions here,
you should still want them to use more rigor than this so that you can be confident that
their grantmaking decisions will reliably match up with their stated values.
“Dear Jason,
 I hope this email finds you well. I wanted to follow up on our conversations regarding CAIP's
funding application to Open Philanthropy.
 After careful consideration and thorough evaluation, we have decided not to recommend CAIP
for funding.
This was a challenging decision in light of the helpful information you’ve sent over the last few
months. We continue to hold CAIP’s thinking on policy development in high regard, and we
appreciate CAIP’s traction in policy engagement and communications. We concluded, however,
that the counterfactual impact does not clear our especially high bar for recommending 501(c)(4)
advocacy organizations, for which heightened sensitivities and less favorable tax treatment
make donor dollars scarce.
This is a reflection in part of the improved overall state of the AI safety advocacy field, where
there are now several organizations doing great work and not enough donors to fund them all.
But, in the interest of transparency, it also reflects our continued sense that CAIP’s strengths and
weaknesses are an imperfect match for its activities. For example, we think CAIP has shown a
capacity for developing and refining detailed policy ideas, and to some extent educating
policymakers and (in the early stages) building grassroots support – all activities that could be
done at a standard nonprofit. But we still have doubts about CAIP’s political aptitudes, and the
lobbying track record, while better than we initially thought, still does not seem strong enough to
create a sufficiently compelling case.
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
13/32

Given our limited funding capacity for advocacy work, we need to direct resources where we
believe they'll have the greatest marginal impact. We know that this decision is likely to create
challenges for CAIP, and we sympathize. We genuinely wish you and the CAIP team success in
your future endeavors, and we appreciate your hard work to improve the outcomes from
transformative AI.
 Best regards,
[Person N]”
Notice that this email does not include any scores, any benchmarks, or any quantitative
information at all. Although the email alludes to an “especially high bar” for
recommending 501(c)(4) organizations, it does not provide any information about where
that bar sits or how it is calculated. The email mentions some of the criteria that Open
Philanthropy considered, such as CAIP’s “counterfactual impact” or its “political
aptitudes,” but does not say how these factors were evaluated or weighted against each
other. It is not clear from the email what it would mean to have high political aptitude or
how Open Philanthropy determined that CAIP’s political aptitude is low or medium. 
This is particularly troubling because without this kind of information, it is unclear how
Open Philanthropy could compare or evaluate the relative good done by a research
organization versus an advocacy organization. There are three times more researchers
than advocates in the space, so on the margins, we can say that Open Philanthropy chose
to fund some additional researchers instead of funding CAIP. Did those researchers have
strong research aptitude? If so, does that mean that those researchers would do more to
reduce the risk of an AI catastrophe than CAIP? Why? How do we know, or what is the basis
of that opinion? It is not clear that Open Philanthropy is even attempting to answer these
questions.
To its credit, Open Philanthropy does have published criteria for its AI governance grants.
However, Open Philanthropy warns that such grants are evaluated “holistically,” and it is
not clear that most of these criteria were consulted when evaluating CAIP’s application.
According to Open Philanthropy’s published criteria, “key considerations … include:”
1. whether the proposed activities are justified by the applicant’s “theory of change,”
2. the applicant’s “track record” of success at similar projects,
3. the applicant’s “strategic judgment” in making “well-thought-out decisions under
uncertainty,”
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
14/32

4. an indication that the applicant is “aware of potential risks and can prioritize how to
respond to them,”
5. the “cost-effectiveness” of the proposed budget in light of “the project’s goals and
planned activities,” and
6. whether the grant application has a financial “scale” that is suitable for this
particular fund. 
Open Philanthropy’s “sense that CAIP’s strengths and weaknesses are an imperfect match
for its activities” could be a reference to criteria #1 and/or #5, although it is difficult to tell,
because the email does not explicitly reference any of the criteria. Similarly, Open
Philanthropy refers to CAIP’s “lobbying track record” as “not…strong enough to create a
sufficiently compelling case,” which could be a reference to criterion #2. 
None of these three criteria are discussed in a clear enough way to allow Open
Philanthropy to easily compare CAIP’s performance to the performance of other
organizations. For example, what precisely does it mean for CAIP’s strengths and
weaknesses to be an “imperfect match for its activities?” Is this like getting 2 out of 5
points? 3 out of 5 points? 4 out of 5 points? How well do other grantees’ strengths and
weaknesses match their activities, and how is this evaluated? Open Philanthropy doesn’t
say. Even if Open Philanthropy’s grantmakers have an intuitive idea in their minds about
what these phrases mean, such intuitions are highly vulnerable to subjective bias and to
being misremembered or subconsciously edited from one grant to the next. The point of
writing down a numerical score for each grant on each criterion is to mitigate such biases. 
Open Philanthropy’s other three criteria are not mentioned at all in their evaluation of
CAIP. I cannot find any discussion of CAIP’s strategic judgment, risk management, or scale.
Even if, for some reason, only half of Open Philanthropy’s criteria were relevant to its
evaluation of CAIP, it would still be helpful for all parties if they explicitly noted this. As I
argue above in the section on “Advantages of Using Formal Rubrics,” the process of
thinking through how each criterion applies to each grantee and writing down your
thoughts helps make sure that you honor your core values and that you are not
accidentally substituting other considerations.
I do not believe the informality of Open Philanthropy’s evaluation techniques is limited to
CAIP. For example, Apart Research recently wrote° that their need to engage in last-minute
fundraising was partly caused by “somewhat limited engagement from OpenPhil's GCR
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
15/32

team on our grants throughout our lifetime,” and that “with OpenPhil, I think we've been
somewhat unlucky with the depth of grant reviews and feedback from their side and
missing the opportunity to respond to their uncertainties.” This is a very polite way of
saying that they don’t know why Open Philanthropy isn’t giving them more funding and
that they haven’t been able to find out.
I also spoke with Soren Messner-Zidell, a senior director at the Brookings Institution who
was hoping to launch an AI safety communications project. He has over 15 years of
experience as a public advocate. After he negotiated with Open Philanthropy for several
weeks, his application was also denied without any type of detailed explanation. Like me,
he does not know what criteria they are using to evaluate AI safety grants.
Longview’s Evaluation
CAIP received a similarly unstructured final report from Longview Philanthropy. Again,
there was no appendix or more detailed letter that provided significantly more
information about Longview’s process. If they conducted any more formal evaluation, they
did not share it with us. Below is the full text of the most relevant email:
Hi Marta and Jason,
Thank you so much for engaging with us throughout this investigation. Sadly, Longview will be
unable to find donors for CAIP's work in the near future. 
This conclusion is based on our completion of several other grant investigations and discussions
with our most reliable donors. The unfortunate reality as we see it is that there are more
promising opportunities in AI policy than our donors are able to fund, and despite CAIP's
strengths, we will not be able to provide funding for it. 
We think CAIP is doing good work. We hope you find the support needed to continue as an
organization, and if you do, we'd be happy to consider recommending CAIP to our donors in the
future. But at least for the next few months, and likely until the end of the year, we will not be
able to find additional funding for CAIP. 
Thank you for all the effort you've put into this important cause. If there's anything beyond
funding that we can do to help going forwards, please let us know. 
Sincerely,
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
16/32

[Person V]
This email is even vaguer than the email from Open Philanthropy because it does not even
gesture at the factors that might have been considered – this email provides only the raw
decision that CAIP is less valuable than other projects. 
Longview’s website provides a list of some of the questions that they consider when
evaluating grants, but it is not clear how the answers to these questions are measured or
which questions are considered most important. Longview does not say anything about
which of CAIP’s answers (if any) were deemed unsatisfactory.
Longview’s website also says that when they recommend a grant for funding, they
“include quantitative predictions, so that philanthropists can clearly see what we expect in
terms of key outcomes, and how likely we think they are.” 
This is praiseworthy, but it is unclear whether Longview follows similar procedures for
rejected grants, or if they only do this for grants that they have already decided to
recommend. If the former, it is unclear why they are unwilling to share even an outline of
their predictions with grant applicants. If the latter, it is unclear how they know which
grants to reject – if, as Longview writes, CAIP “is doing good work,” then how was
Longview able to decide not to recommend CAIP even before Longview made any
quantitative predictions? If the rejection isn’t based on a quantitative prediction, then what
is it based on?
I find the lack of detail disturbing, and I think you should too. If there is some particular
scoring factor (e.g. one donor’s private preferences) that must be kept secret in order to
maximize total funding, then that particular scoring factor could be censored. However, to
share no details at all about the grant evaluation process with potential grantees sets them
up for failure and wastes everyone’s time. If we don’t know how we’re being measured or
what standard we’re being held to, then we can’t make realistic plans to achieve those
goals.
LTFF’s Evaluation
The Long-Term Future Fund rejected a CAIP grant application in March 2024, and sent
only a standard form rejection. They wrote, “We have reviewed your application carefully
and regret to inform you that we have decided not to fund your project… Please note that
we are unable to provide further feedback at this time due to the high volume of
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
17/32

applications we are currently receiving. We know that this is something many applicants
in your position want and I hope that when we have more capacity we will be able to give
more feedback.”
A year later, in March 2025, I wrote to [Person AA], the manager of the Long-Term Future
Fund, to see if they had developed additional capacity; I mentioned that I was travelling to
California and would be happy to meet with him in-person to learn more about which
projects they were interested in funding. My email wound up in his spam folder by
mistake. We noticed this problem while LTFF was reviewing an advance copy of this post,
and Person AA mentioned that Person K and Person L both have more DC experience than
he does, implying that they would be better positioned to discuss how CAIP’s grant
application was evaluated.
I repeatedly attempted to get feedback from Person K about why he felt that CAIP was not a
funding priority, both while he was working at CAIP and after he left in February 2024.
However, he did not have any specific criticisms or criteria to share other than his general
feeling that political advocacy as a whole was unpromising and that CAIP did not seem to
be generating the kind of results he was looking for. He repeatedly offered to write up his
objections in more detail, but he never did so.
I also reached out to Person L, and he wrote, “I'm not sure that I'd be able to provide a ton of
useful info. I'm not actually personally that aware of what CAIP has been up to, and if
anyone were to ask me what my thoughts are on CAIP, I'm pretty sure their main takeaway
from my response would be that I don't have enough context to have a strong view either
way.”
I was able to chat in April 2025 with Person MM, another LTFF fund manager. Person MM
did share some of his concerns about funding projects like CAIP. His main objection
seemed to be that – so far as he could tell – CAIP was publicly conflating the issue of “AI
being unreliable, or being used in critical systems” with “AI becoming agentic and
deceptive and eradicating all of humanity.” He expressed his worry that CAIP had sold out
or would sell out by trading away the clarity and honesty of its message in exchange for
political influence. I promised that CAIP was firmly opposed to any such trade, and I cited
three of our recent public articles in which CAIP openly and clearly states its intense
concern about existential risk. However, Person MM did not directly respond to this
information. 
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
18/32

I defend CAIP’s choice to include at least some mention of less-catastrophic risks in our
conversations with Congressional staffers in the first post° in this sequence. Even if LTFF
does not find this defense convincing, I would still hope that they make their funding
decisions based on some type of formal criteria, rather than informally rejecting
applications from groups like CAIP based on a general opinion that most groups who work
in Washington, DC will inevitably lose their focus on existential risk. For example, LTFF
might have a rubric that they use to evaluate the quality of an advocacy group’s public-
facing communications, including both the level of focus on x-risk and presumably several
other factors, and then assign a certain number of points to the grantee based on how well
the grantee’s actual communications actually satisfy each of those factors.
When I asked Person MM about whether LTFF used these kinds of formal written criteria
for evaluating grants, he said, “I don’t think there exists a single functional fund in the
world with ‘formalized grantmaking criteria,’ so of course not.” Person MM pointed out
that his thoughts on grantmaking principles are spread across many comments on
LessWrong and the EA Forum, and that these would be “kind of a pain to stitch together.”
Person MM added that LTFF intentionally “has people with different principles and
perspectives” on grantmaking, so LTFF does not have any “universal grantmaking
criteria.”
As I showed in the previous section, many funds do in fact use formal written criteria, for
the very good reasons that (1) this helps them ensure that the grants they fund are actually
optimizing for their core values, and (2) this helps prospective grantees submit grants to
organizations that are more likely to fund them, thereby making better use of everyone’s
time. If Person MM himself would find it unreasonably inconvenient to stitch together his
own comments on grantmaking principles, then surely it would also be unreasonably
inconvenient for prospective grantees to do so, especially since they do not know which
LTFF reviewer will be assigned to their application – in order to intelligently plan a grant
that is likely to receive LTFF funding, they would have to hunt through old comment
sections to find comments from several different possible reviewers and then decide which
comments (if any) are most relevant. 
Similarly, if a grantmaker’s principles are spread out across many decentralized comments,
then it is harder for that grantmaker to use those principles as a tool to focus their own
thinking – instead of reliably following their most important principles, they may
sometimes be distracted by secondary considerations. Most grantmakers should be using
written grant evaluation criteria for the same reason that most people should be keeping a
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
19/32

written calendar – it’s important to get it right, and writing things down in a central place
helps you remember and act on your priorities.
To their credit, LTFF staff have put together a sample of different portfolios of hypothetical
grants° that they would fund depending on the current size of the LTFF budget, and these
portfolios could help guide prospective applicants. Most of the twenty grants in the
portfolios relate to academic-style research in some way, either by directly funding such
research, or by funding people who want to continue their academic education. A few
grants discuss AI governance research, but none seem to be about direct political advocacy.
The closest approach is a hypothetical grant to hire a communications firm to teach best
practices to professionals in longtermist organizations, which presumably might then lead
to some of those professionals engaging in advocacy or improving the quality of their
advocacy. The range of grants that LTFF is even willing to consider thus seems to be
heavily biased toward research and away from advocacy.
As part of their explanation of how they created these portfolios, LTFF notes that “At the
LTFF, we assign each grant application to a Principal Investigator (PI) who assesses its
potential benefits, drawbacks, and financial cost. The PI scores the application from -5 to
+5. Subsequently, other fund managers may also score it. The grant gets approved if its
average score surpasses the funding threshold, which historically varied from 2.0 to 2.5,
but is currently at 2.9.” 
While this quantitative scoring is at least a step in the right direction toward rigor, it does
not seem to include any explicit scoring factors or rubrics. Any given investigator is
essentially still making a subjective judgment; it’s just that they’re then reducing that
subjective judgment to a number. There is no way for grantees to predict what that number
might be or to design grants that are more likely to earn a higher number. To the extent
that LTFF is suffering from a systematic bias toward research and away from advocacy,
nothing about the process of writing down a single number for each grant would tend to
correct that bias.
Other Evaluations
I had similar trouble getting any kind of concrete explanation of the funding process from
other AI safety funders. SFF provides anonymous feedback from its recommenders, and
allows for one round of follow-up questioning between the grantees and its
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
20/32

recommenders, but the recommenders did not appear to have any type of rigorous process
for scoring their applications.
For example, one SFF recommender wrote “I'm not a DC insider, I was mainly deferring to
what DC people told me.” Another SFF recommender wrote, “The main reason I was unable
to fund you was applications by more excellent US policy organizations than we had room
to fund.” Some of the recommenders mentioned that they thought other organizations had
done more to promote “counterfactual policy changes,” but did not say which changes they
had in mind or why the changes at other organizations were more valuable. None of the
recommenders cited any numbers in support of their funding recommendations.
Macroscopic Ventures had even less information. An email we received from Macroscopic’s
President, Ruairi Donnely, said only that “we discussed this with some of our grantmaking
advisors and unfortunately we have decided not to make a grant. Sorry for not having
better news. I hope you manage to secure funding and wish you all the best with your
work.”
WHY ISN’T THERE MORE RIGOR IN AI
SAFETY GRANTMAKING?
A lack of detail in post-evaluation debriefings is excusable if there are clear, publicly
available criteria for evaluating grants. Most grantmakers don’t have time to explain their
conclusions to all of the hundreds of people who apply for their funding, especially since
many of those applications will be low-quality or otherwise not a plausible fit for the
grantmaker’s particular fund. If AI safety grantmakers had published quantitative criteria
for scoring grants and then shared the resulting scores with applicants, I would not be
expecting any further information.
What I find outrageous is that AI grantmakers are neither publishing formal criteria before
applications are evaluated nor writing detailed feedback after grants are awarded. This
means that nobody has any way of telling why some grants are funded and others are
denied.
Reasonable Overhead
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
21/32

This lack of rigor in AI safety grantmaking would make more sense if AI safety funders
were only distributing $1 million per year. If grantmaking budgets are small enough, then
the extra time it would take you to develop a formal process and explain it to grantees is
not cost-effective, because too much of your budget would be going to overhead.
However, this is not a reasonable explanation in the context of AI safety grantmaking.
Open Philanthropy alone gives out more than $100 million per year just on AI governance.
An average level of administrative overhead for a foundation is 11% to 15%. If you spend
5% of the overhead budget (so, about half a percent of the total grant volume) on designing
and communicating formal rubrics, you’d have a budget of at least $600,000 per year, i.e.,
enough to pay a couple of full-time employees just to work on AI governance grantmaking
rubrics. Obviously, this has not been happening.
It should be happening, because it’s very easy to reap large savings or other large benefits
from clearly explaining your grant procedures. If CAIP was an unnecessary expense, then
the movement could have saved $2 million by clearly communicating that in advance –
more than enough to cover whatever staff time was required to develop and communicate
the relevant criteria. 
Linchuan Zhang of LTFF once wrote° that most LTFF grantmakers are “very part-time,”
because they work long hours for their day jobs and only attend to LTFF grant applications
with the limited time that they have remaining. He speculates that “full-time grantmakers
at places like Open Phil and Future Fund” might “have similarly packed schedules as well,
due to the sheer volume of grants.”
If there is a shortage of staff time, then AI safety funders need to hire more staff. If they
don’t have time to hire more staff, then they need to hire headhunters to do so for them. If
a grantee is running up against a budget crisis before the new grantmaking staff can be
on-boarded, then funders can maintain the grantee’s program at present funding levels
while they wait for their new staff to become available.
Instead, AI safety funders appear to be just trusting their instincts and giving out money
based on their intuitive preferences – even though there’s every reason to believe that this
results in deeply suboptimal awards.
Micro-Dooms Per Dollar
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
22/32

One of the grant managers at LTFF, [Person K], once told me that he thought it might be
helpful for AI safety funders to evaluate projects in terms of a standard number of “micro-
dooms” per dollar that each project is expected to avert. For example, if grantors believe
that a project will reduce the risk of catastrophe by 0.01%, then they would give it credit for
preventing 100 micro-dooms. This would provide a fair and reasonable way of comparing
the value of AI safety projects that operate in relatively different specialties, such as
advocacy targeted at politicians, abstract governance research, and communications aimed
at the general public.
However, none of the funders that CAIP spoke with said anything to us about how many
micro-dooms they expected CAIP to avert, or about their targets for how many micro-
dooms per dollar they expected to avoid when funding a successful project, or how they
would calculate the number of micro-dooms averted by a project. 
I followed up with Person K while writing this post, and he wrote that, “In the past year or
so, I've updated towards the position that it’s very difficult to do correct cost effectiveness
evaluations, and so we mostly just have to make best guess qualitative judgements. I
believe this is basically the standard grant maker take.”
I agree that it is difficult to make accurate cost-effectiveness evaluations, but I would be
very surprised if the effort of trying were not worthwhile. When you attempt to quantify
the value of an outcome, even if you make an error, your attempt will probably be more
rigorous and more accurate than an attempt made without using any numbers at all. As
long as you’re honest about your error bars, you should be able to at least compare the
benefits offered by two different grants in terms of their likely orders of magnitude.
If AI safety grant evaluations are so challenging that grantmakers can’t even arrive at an
approximate order of magnitude for the micro-dooms that each grant is likely to avert,
then that strongly suggests that grantmakers don’t know enough about specific AI safety
projects to be usefully picking and choosing individual grants. In that case, grantmakers
may as well just assign a high funding priority to every plausible grant in the most
effective category – and the most effective category, as I have been arguing for the last
40,000 words, is advocacy, not research, because only advocacy has the power to change
the incentives of the private AI developers who are likely to carry us with them into ruin.
CONCLUSION
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
23/32

Each year, most of the hundreds of millions of dollars that are donated to AI governance
are spent on academic-style research. There does not appear to be any clear idea of what
this research is supposed to accomplish, how those accomplishments will improve the
world, or how much value this research will generate per dollar. The process that results in
awarding grants to researchers appears to be based primarily on intuition and subjective
judgments, rather than on any formal criteria. 
If our AI safety funders were staffed by grantmaking experts who had worked for
prestigious mainstream philanthropies, then I would be more inclined to give them the
benefit of the doubt and assume that they do have rigorous rubrics hidden away
somewhere, and that they’ve just chosen not to share them for some unspecified reason.
However, instead, our AI safety donors are staffed by people who have very little
grantmaking experience outside the EA bubble. It seems entirely plausible that most of them
are simply unfamiliar with proper grantmaking procedures, or unfamiliar with the reasons why
such procedures are useful.
Similarly, if our AI safety funders were staffed by experts in political advocacy who had
worked for many years in DC, then I would be more inclined to give them the benefit of the
doubt and assume that they do have some good reason for directing most of their funding
toward academic-style research, even though – as I have argued throughout this sequence
– further academic research doesn’t seem at all likely to prevent an AI disaster. 
Unfortunately, we do not have grantmakers who know from deep personal experience
what things are really like in Capitol Hill or Sacramento or the Supreme Court or the White
House. Instead, we mostly have grantmakers who have perhaps completed a political
internship at some point, and who are making decisions primarily based on their
experience as academic-style researchers who have published papers and talked to other
researchers. As such, it seems entirely plausible that most of them are simply biased toward
funding other researchers because they find research to be a familiar and comfortable topic.
We are therefore getting suboptimal results: instead of funding the best available projects
that are most likely to positively impact the future, AI governance donors are primarily
funding the projects that subjectively appeal to their staff.
My point here is not to criticize AI governance grantmaking staff – I believe they are all
doing the best they can with the tools they have available. My point is that our
grantmaking teams have not been given the right tools: we need to hire additional
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
24/32

grantmakers who have the political and mainstream philanthropic experience we need to
invest wisely in the most effective AI governance grants.
Similarly, I do not want to offer any harsh criticism to AI governance donors simply
because they have not hired the optimal teams for their grantmaking staff: at least the AI
governance donors are donating to a good cause. Thousands of donors pick far less
important causes to support, and hundreds of millions of well-off people in developed
countries do not bother to make any significant donations at all. By comparison with their
peers, people like Cari Tuna and Jaan Tallinn are doing an enormous amount of good. In
general, I appreciate their efforts, and I truly am grateful for their support, even though I
have spent most of this sequence complaining. If I met the donors, I would offer to shake
their hands and buy them a drink.
Nevertheless, I cannot hide my sadness that so much of the money that has been donated
to the urgent and important cause of AI safety is on track to be spent in ways that will have
only a tiny marginal impact on the future. It is a tragic, avoidable, and enormous waste. If
there is any chance that I can ameliorate some of this waste by speaking out about it, then I
feel a duty to do so.
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Hire staff to fill the gaps in political and
philanthropic expertise
If you work at a large AI safety donor such as Open Philanthropy or Longview, I urge you to
aggressively hire (1) experienced political advocates, and (2) experienced grantmakers
from mainstream philanthropies. Jobs for these positions should be constantly open and
widely advertised until at least ten new people with the relevant expertise have been hired
in each of these two categories.
In addition, grantmakers should use the handful of experts they already have to help find
more people with the experience they need. Open Philanthropy did very well to hire
Melanie Harris, who is a genuine political expert; they should be asking her for referrals
both for Open Philanthropy and for other grantmakers.  Similarly, Carl Robichaud at
Longview Philanthropy spent a decade running grantmaking in nuclear security at the
Carnegie Corporation; if they are not already doing so, then Longview’s AI team should be
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
25/32

trying to tap his expertise to improve their AI safety grantmaking processes, and they
should be trying to tap his network to hire additional staff with mainstream philanthropic
expertise.
If you don’t have time to manage that hiring process, then I urge you to hire a headhunter
to do so for you – the McCormick Group and NRG Consulting both have relevant networks
in DC. If you don’t have the funding to hire the additional grantmakers, then I urge you to
try to redirect some of your organization’s external grant funding to free up the resources
to hire more internal staff. The lack of expertise in these categories is wrecking the
average effectiveness of AI safety grants, so a small cut in the total size of those grants
could easily be ‘paid for’ by investing in a better process that would make the remaining
grants more efficient.
As I write this, in June 2025, it is remarkably easy to hire high-quality political and
philanthropic staff. Washington, DC is full of Democrats who are looking for work because
their party is out of power, full of moderate Republicans who don’t fit in well with the
MAGA agenda, and full of civil servants who have been fired or otherwise pressured to
leave their jobs. Similarly, the widespread budget cuts and budget uncertainties around,
e.g., USAID, Harvard research programs, and government contracting mean that
traditional philanthropies are less able to attract and retain their top talent. We should take
advantage of the ready supply of talent by hiring new kinds of experts.
To do so, we should be editing our job descriptions to stress our appreciation for political
and philanthropic talent, and we should be posting those job descriptions on several
mainstream job boards.
For example, one of Longview’s current openings for a new grantmaker specifies that the
grantmaker should be a “US AI policy specialist,” but that opening allows for the
possibility that the position could be filled by someone whose primary policy experience is
as an academic-style policy researcher. Editing these types of job descriptions to more
firmly emphasize the organization’s interest in and appreciation for political skills and
experience would go a long way toward making political advocates feel that they will be
welcome inside the EA movement. 
Similarly, if it has not already been added there, then both that job description and other
new positions should be posted to a wide variety of job boards that specialize in political or
policy work, such as Tom Manatos Jobs, the Internet Law & Policy Foundry, the Public
Interest Tech Job Board, Daybook, Roll Call Jobs, and the Public Affairs Council.
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
26/32

Aggressively advertising a few explicitly-political positions to job seekers with relevant
political experience would help create a critical mass of political advocates within the
movement, which could then make it much easier to attract and retain other political
advocates as needed.
2. Write and publish formal grantmaking criteria
If you work at a large AI safety donor, then I urge you to agree upon, write up, and publish
formal grantmaking criteria. (If it’s important to your organization to allow for a diversity
of grantmaking priorities, then have each individual grantmaker write up and publish
their own priorities and explain how they will evaluate which grants meet those
priorities.)
What this means is not just listing some of the things that you believe are good to have in
grants, but also developing an organized process that will prompt you to apply your criteria to
each grant and decide for yourself how well each grant application meets each criterion,
ideally by assigning a numerical score to each factor and weighting the results. 
At least some of these scores should be based on objective or quantitative factors where
different people will readily agree on what the approximate value of the score should be. In
other words, don’t just check whether a grant is “cost-effective” – check whether it
delivers a certain number of meetings or papers or videos or laws per dollar. If you’re
measuring “expertise,” don’t just ask yourself whether you think an applicant’s staff has
good experience – write up a description of what kinds of experiences you would like their
staff to have, and then award points based on how many of those experiences are present
on the team. 
Even if you ultimately decide not to follow the ‘advice’ of a particular set of scores, it’s still
an incredibly useful constraint to be forced to check to see what that advice is and to
explain why you will or will not follow it in any particular case.
People are drawn to the field of AI safety based on their sincere concern for the public
good, but even high-integrity people suffer from cognitive biases and can benefit from
using tools (like written rubrics) to help manage those biases. Even if your grantmaking
team is so sharp that it can perfectly uphold its values without referring to any written
materials, your prospective grantees need formal grantmaking criteria so that they can see
what they’re supposed to do and intelligently direct their efforts. Not having formal
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
27/32

published criteria sets your grantees up to fail and forces you to read a glut of poorly
tailored grant applications that are not a good fit for your organization’s funding priorities.
It’s helpful to regularly write about what kinds of grants you want to fund, but it’s even
more helpful to publish quantitative criteria; the more information grantees have about
your values, the more improvements you’ll see in the average quality of the grant
applications you receive.
3. Put social pressure on AI grantmakers
If your friends or colleagues or co-authors work for AI governance donors, then I urge you
to pressure them to repair the gaps in their staffing and to publish more of their
grantmaking criteria. Ask them what they’re doing to respond to the concerns raised in
this sequence. Follow up at parties and at co-working sessions. Making these changes will
take several weeks, but there’s no good reason for them to take more than a year – ask
your friends what they plan to do, and when they plan to do it. The resulting conversations
could be awkward, but failure to make these changes will increase the odds of an
existential catastrophe.
4. Consider conducting your own grant investigations
If you are a medium-size AI safety donor, and you see that the larger donors are not
responding to this advice, then I urge you to consider making some of your own grant
evaluations. Evaluating the efficacy of political advocacy is challenging, and it is probably
not something that you can do well in an afternoon, but depending on the size of your
contributions, it might be worth your while to hire an experienced analyst on a short-term
contract. A professional analyst might be able to write a set of criteria and manage one
grant round, in, e.g., three months, suggesting a ballpark cost of $50,000. You might be
able to share this cost with one or two friends, or you might be able to defray that cost by
investing a significant portion of your own time in making your own independent
evaluations. 
Please consider the odds that you would actually agree with the judgments being made by
institutional donors if you conducted your own investigation, and please consider how
much more good you might be able to do by funding the organization that you judge to
have made the best-available application in the field, rather than funding more academic
research that lacks a clear theory of change. If you can do twice as much good with a well-
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
28/32

chosen advocacy grant compared to a well-chosen research grant, then hiring your own
analyst could start to make sense on a total grantmaking budget that’s as small as
$100,000.
GOODBYE FOR NOW
Thank you for reading this extremely long sequence and for the financial and moral
support that many of you have offered along the way. Despite your support, I cannot afford
to pay any of the staff at the Center for AI Policy, and so we have ceased operations for now.
The non-profit corporation and the website will remain active for the foreseeable future,
and I myself remain willing and able to rejoin the movement on a full-time basis if and
when sufficient funding becomes available. In the meantime, if any of you have questions
about how to make your AI governance work more relevant, I am always happy to help at
jason@aipolicy.us.
Previous:
Political Funding Expertise (Post 6
of 7 on AI Governance)
1 comments
37 karma
Comments 2
Sorted by New & upvoted
Kestrel🔸
5
0
15
Thanks for this series. It helps illuminate a murky area.
Seems to me that it supports the same basic fact I've seen for a while now: the highest-impact stuff is
increasingly in the political sphere, a community mismatch where engaged EAs and EA funders are
drawn more towards soft political neutrality.
10mo
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
29/32

I have no good answers to this problem.
SummaryBot
0
0
1
Executive summary: The post argues that AI safety grantmaking is dominated by research-focused
insiders who lack mainstream political and philanthropic experience, resulting in informal and often
opaque funding decisions that neglect high-impact advocacy work; it calls for more rigorous,
transparent procedures and greater investment in politically experienced staff to ensure funding
decisions align with effective altruist goals.
Key points:
1. Mismatch Between Research and Advocacy Needs: The field disproportionately funds
academic-style research over political advocacy, even though the latter is more likely to
achieve real-world impact in reducing AI risk.
2. Insularity and Lack of External Expertise: Most AI safety grantmakers have no experience in
mainstream philanthropy or professional advocacy, leading to poor adoption of established best
practices.
3. Absence of Formal Evaluation Criteria: Funders often make grant decisions based on subjective
judgments without using transparent rubrics, benchmarks, or quantifiable goals, leaving
grantees without guidance.
4. Challenges of Feedback and Accountability: The lack of measurable feedback loops in AI
governance is compounded by an unwillingness to establish even proxy metrics or structured
evaluations.
5. Recommendations for Reform: The post urges funders to hire experts in politics and
philanthropy, adopt formal grantmaking criteria, and support medium donors in conducting
independent grant evaluations.
6. Call to Action and Closure: With CAIP suspended due to lack of funding, the author remains
available for consultation and calls for systemic reform to prevent waste and better serve the
mission of AI safety.
This comment was auto-generated by the EA Forum Team. Feel free to point out issues with this
summary by replying to the comment, and contact us if you have feedback.
10mo
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
30/32

More from Jason Green-Lowe
View more
Curated and popular this week
Impact Requires Implementation: What Dispensers for Safe Water Scale-Back Can Teach
Us About Monitoring
 · 13d ago · 17m read  · 
3
The AI people have been right a lot
 · 4d ago · 7m read  · 
11
In Development Magazine Launch
 · 4d ago · 1m read  · 
4
Recent opportunities in AI safety
141
· 1y ago · 40m read
25
Jason Green-Lowe
63
· 11mo ago · 38m read
5
Jason Green-Lowe
61
· 1y ago · 16m read
0
Jason Green-Lowe
Tony Senanayake
TL;DR Between 2022 and 2023, GiveWell and Open Philanthropy committed over $70 million to
Evidence Action’s Dispensers for Safe Water programme. An independent survey in 2025 found that in
Uganda and Malawi the programme was reaching approximately 70% fewer people with detectable…
Dylan Matthews
This post was crossposted from Dylan Matthew's blog by the EA Forum
team. The author may not see or reply to comments. ----------------------
------------------ Subtitle: Try to keep an open mind as the world gets…
Lauren Gilbert
We're announcing a new development magazine: In Development. Our goal is to promote discourse on
development without dogma. In other words, we public stories doing deep dives into pressing
development issues, backed up by evidence, argument, and experience. The first piece is by Paul…
Please Donate to CAIP (Post 1 of 7 on AI Governance)
Shift Resources to Advocacy Now (Post 4 of 7 on AI Governance)
The Need for Political Advertising (Post 2 of 7 on AI Governance)
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
31/32

View more
148
· 8d ago · 9m read
16
Sophie Kim
11
· 13h ago · 3m read
0
Tobias Häberli, Tilman, James Nicholas Bryant, Ariel
2
· 5d ago · 2m read
0
Mateusz Bagiński, Grace Roberts
The Anthropic IPO Is Coming. We Aren't Ready for It.
Pivotal Research Fellowship applications are open (deadline May 3)
Applications open for the Online wing of the AFFINE Superintelligence A…
4/20/26, 10:13 PM
Mainstream Grantmaking Expertise (Post 7 of 7 on AI Governance) — EA Forum
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/85yGkxJYfKnfCd9ME
32/32
