8/2/26, 12:42 PM

A Framework for Frontier AI and the Dawning of a New Age

A Framework for Frontier AI and the Dawning of
New Age
DEMIS HASSABIS
JUL 14, 2026

1,677

364

Sh

This is a pivotal moment in human history. Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), a
system that exhibits all the cognitive capabilities the brain has, is probably only a fe
short years away. When we look back on this time in the decades to come, I think w
will realise we were standing in the foothills of the singularity - nothing less than th
dawning of a new age for humanity.
I’ve spent my whole life working on AGI because I’ve always had a deep conviction
that, if built and deployed responsibly, it would prove to be one of the most benefici

https://demishassabis.substack.com/p/a-framework-for-frontier-ai-and-the-dawning-of-a-new-age

1/6

8/2/26, 12:42 PM

A Framework for Frontier AI and the Dawning of a New Age

and transformative technologies ever invented. AGI cannot be compared to standar
technological breakthroughs, not even ones as consequential as the internet or mob
- it is much more akin to the discovery of electricity or fire. If you stop to think abou
it, we’ve essentially found a way to make sand think. It’s miraculous.
The magnitude of this technology’s impact will be unprecedented, perhaps 10x of th
Industrial Revolution at 10x the speed. It will help us solve some of the biggest
problems society faces from accelerating drug discovery to developing new clean
energy sources to creating novel advanced materials. We could even reach a point
where resources are no longer the limiting factor for human progress, leading to an
amazing new era of abundance.

The Challenges of the Frontier
AI is already starting to deliver real-world benefits but to realise its immense prom
we have to navigate this critical period of development thoughtfully and carefully.
Urgent action is needed to address risks that might arise as we get closer to AGI.
We’ve already seen the challenges frontier models pose for cybersecurity, and other
threats including nuclear and bio risks may soon emerge as capabilities continue to
advance. On the horizon, we will need robust safeguards to maintain control of
increasingly agentic, recursively self-improving systems - and tackle unknown issue
that will only become clearer over time.
I’ve always believed in the power of human ingenuity and creativity to solve any
problem. I’m confident that mitigating the technical risks related to AI is a challeng
we can collectively address, but only if we give ourselves the time and space to get t
next crucial step right. Currently, as a field and as a wider society, we aren’t doing t
At the moment, we are locked in an extremely intense, multilayered commercial and
geopolitical race. While these competitive dynamics fuel rapid progress and acceler
the incredible upsides, advances on the frontier are outpacing our understanding of

https://demishassabis.substack.com/p/a-framework-for-frontier-ai-and-the-dawning-of-a-new-age

2/6

8/2/26, 12:42 PM

A Framework for Frontier AI and the Dawning of a New Age

the technology. Nobody in the world knows for sure what is going to happen from
here, and even the experts disagree. When there is a large degree of uncertainty and
the stakes are this high, proceeding with cautious optimism is the sensible and corr
strategy. That calls for public policy that promotes innovation while also incentivis
responsibility and security, fosters international collaboration on key safety issues,
encourages careful consideration of how AI is deployed for the benefit of society.

A Framework for a Frontier AI Standards Body
The rapid progress we’re seeing in AI requires a new approach to testing frontier A
model capabilities that is dynamic, adaptable, and rigorous. The US is well position
given its economic and technical standing, to take the first step in developing such
framework. It could establish a new Standards Body modelled on a federally oversee
public-private partnership or self-regulatory organisation, much like the Financial
Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA), with a board that includes independent
leading technical experts and open-source representatives. Funding would need to b
substantial and likely mostly come from industry, in order to attract world-class
technical talent and provide the necessary compute resources for large-scale testing
The Standards Body would be responsible for developing assessment protocols and
working with appropriate federal agencies and the US National Labs to conduct
testing in areas relevant to national security. A model would qualify as ‘Frontier-cla
if it meets certain thresholds on a set of benchmarks determined by the Standards
Body and regularly updated to keep pace with evolving AI capabilities. Organisatio
with ‘Frontier Models’ as defined by those benchmarks would be deemed ‘Frontier
Labs’, and be encouraged to adopt best practices, such as publishing model cards w
technical details, maintaining strong internal cybersecurity, vetting key personnel,
providing sufficient resourcing for safety and security research, and more.
Initially, Frontier Labs would voluntarily share models with the Standards Body for
review up to 30 days before release. Once the assessment protocol is shown to be

https://demishassabis.substack.com/p/a-framework-for-frontier-ai-and-the-dawning-of-a-new-age

3/6

8/2/26, 12:42 PM

A Framework for Frontier AI and the Dawning of a New Age

effective and robust, formalisation could quickly follow, meaning that Frontier Mod
would be required to pass it to be deployed in the US market. Labs would also work
with the Standards Body to address any critical post-release vulnerabilities.
Model assessments should include rigorous scientific evaluations of capabilities in
cybersecurity, biological threats and other high-risk domains. Specific agentic AI te
could look for attempts to bypass safety guardrails or signs of deception, and ensure
best practices, such as digitally watermarking AI-generated images and generating
human-readable output tokens to understand model reasoning.
These evaluations would be regularly updated, perhaps quarterly to start, with
outdated or saturated benchmarks being deprecated and replaced. Initially, they wo
be developed in consultation with Frontier Labs, but eventually the Standards Body
should build up the technical capacity to create its own held-out tests independent
the Labs to prevent overfitting. Working with the US government, it could promote
ecosystem of third-party auditors to help with the assessments and development of
new benchmarks and evaluations.
The strength of this approach is it would be technically focused, while at the same
time supporting innovation and incentivising responsible behaviour. It is designed
keep up with the field’s acceleration and adapt to the biggest risks as they are
identified, and could be ratcheted up if the seriousness of the situation demands,
including coordinating a slowdown in development among the Frontier Labs if
deemed necessary. Being designated a Frontier Lab would carry significant prestige
and be open to any organisation by building models that meet the benchmark criter
The framework could apply to Frontier-class models no matter their country of orig
or whether they are open or closed, but any non-frontier models, say from startups o
academia, would be exempt from this process.
This US-initiated effort would provide a strong starting point for creating shared
international standards on Frontier AI. Since this technology is going to affect the
entire planet, ideally this framework would spur the international community to rea
https://demishassabis.substack.com/p/a-framework-for-frontier-ai-and-the-dawning-of-a-new-age

4/6

8/2/26, 12:42 PM

A Framework for Frontier AI and the Dawning of a New Age

a consensus on how to manage the most serious risks while ensuring everyone has
access to and can benefit from the opportunities that AI brings.

The Future Is Not Yet Written
AGI has the potential to be the ultimate tool for advancing science and medicine, a
to drive enormous productivity gains and economic growth. But in order to achieve
this, we need to get the technical foundations right by coordinating around a shared
global framework, using the most rigorous scientific methods, and bringing the bes
minds together to work on the challenges we face.
Even if we solve these hard technical challenges, there will be further complex
economic and philosophical questions to tackle: what sorts of new economic model
will be needed to help everyone thrive in a post-scarcity world? What values do we
want to live by, what will meaning and purpose be, and how might even the human
condition itself change? Resolving these questions obviously cannot and should not
left to technologists alone. It requires every part of society to come together to help
define this new chapter.
There is both huge excitement and uncertainty around AI, and both are warranted.
the future is not yet written, we must use this precious window before AGI arrives t
shape this technology for the benefit of all humanity. What we collectively do now w
determine how the next phase of civilisation unfolds. By safely stewarding AGI into
the world, we can enter a new golden age of scientific discovery and progress, and
usher in a bright future of incredible human flourishing.
Demis Hassabis
Nobel Laureate | Co-Founder & CEO, Google DeepMind & Isomorphic Labs

Subscribe to Demis Hassabis
https://demishassabis.substack.com/p/a-framework-for-frontier-ai-and-the-dawning-of-a-new-age

5/6

8/2/26, 12:42 PM

A Framework for Frontier AI and the Dawning of a New Age

Launched 19 days ago
Type your email...

Subscribe

By subscribing, you agree Substack's Terms of Use, and
acknowledge its Information Collection Notice and Privacy Policy.
1,677 Likes ∙ 364 Restacks

© 2026 Demis Hassabis · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice
Substack is the home for great culture

https://demishassabis.substack.com/p/a-framework-for-frontier-ai-and-the-dawning-of-a-new-age

6/6

