The Compendium
By Connor Leahy, Gabriel Alfour, Chris Scammell, Andrea Miotti, Adam Shimi
V1.3.1 - Dec 9, 2024
Humanity risks extinction from its very creations.

Ideologically motivated companies are racing to build smarter-than-human AIs. Big Tech 
already backs them, and now nation states are getting roped in too. If they succeed in 
creating AIs outsmarting humanity, it would be game over -- no one knows how to keep 
control of these AIs.

The Compendium explains these extinction risks from AI, where they come from, and how 
we can fix them.

The Compendium is a living document, and we will update it over time as the landscape 
changes. We welcome your feedback, which you can provide through this form.

Contents
 Contents.
Executive Summary​
3
(0) Introduction​
5
Foreword​
5
Overview​
9
(1) The state of AI today​
12
Rapid AI progress is driven by resources, not insights​
13
AI is grown, not built​
16
The race to AGI is on, and potentially deadly​
18
(2) Intelligence​
21
Intelligence is mechanistic and it is possible to build AGI​
21
What is intelligence?​
22
Tools​
22
Groups​
23
Methods​
24
A mechanistic model of intelligence​
25
Applications to artificial intelligence​
25
Against arguments of AI limitations​
28
The AI Effect​
28
The general issue with missing components​
30
Thus, AGI​
32
(3) AI Catastrophe​
33
Current AI research leads to extinction by godlike AI​
33
Without intervention, current AI research leads to AGI​
33
Without intervention, AGI leads to artificial superintelligence (ASI)​
35
ASI will exceed individual human intelligence​
37
ASI will exceed humanity’s intelligence​
38
Without intervention, ASI leads to godlike AI​
40
Without intervention, godlike AI leads to extinction​
42
(4) AI Safety​
44
We are not on track to solve the hard problems of safety​
44
Defining alignment​
44
Estimating the cost of solving alignment​
46
Current technical efforts are not on track to solve alignment​
50
AI will not solve alignment for us​
54
 The Compendium | 1 

Contents
(5) AI Governance​
57
We lack the mechanisms to control technology development​
57
Defining AI governance​
57
Estimating what is necessary to control AI development​
58
Current AI policy efforts are not on track to control AI development​
60
Current AI policy efforts endorse the race to AGI​
66
(6)  The AI Race​
70
The race to AGI is ideological, and will drive us to the exact dangers it claims to avoid​ 70
The AGI race is ideologically driven​
71
Utopists: Building AGI to usher in utopia​
71
AGI companies​
71
Entente​
75
Big Tech: Keeping a hand on the technological frontier​
78
Accelerationists: Idolizing technological progress​
79
Zealots: Worshiping superintelligence​
81
Opportunists: Following the hype​
82
These ideologies shape the playing field​
82
The strategies being used to justify and perpetuate the race to AGI are not new​
85
The Industry Playbook​
85
Spreading confusion through misinformation and double-speak​
89
Turning care into acceleration​
91
Capturing and neutralizing regulation and research​
92
Capturing AI regulation​
92
Capturing safety research​
94
How will this go?​
95
(7) A good future, if you can keep it​
97
Civic duty is the foundation of a response to AGI risk​
97
Creating a vision and a plan for a good future​
99
The authors’ plan​
100
Actions to help reduce AGI risk​
102
Communication​
103
Coordination​
106
Civics​
108
Technical Caution​
109
(8) Outro​
111
 The Compendium | 2 

Introduction
 Executive Summary. 
The Compendium explains the extinction risks from AI, where they come from, and how to 
address them.
The trigger  to the current situation is the explosion of AI progress in the last 10 years, 
reaching near-human-level in writing, coding, art, math, and many more fields of human 
activity. This progress has been driven by deep learning, which differs from traditional 
software: modern AIs are grown by feeding them massive amounts of data and letting 
them evolve in response, not built piece by piece by humans. First, this means that 
researchers and engineers don’t need to understand AIs to create them – indeed experts 
consistently fail to anticipate how quickly new skills will be unlocked, or how existing AIs 
work.  Second, this makes continued progress bottlenecked only by resources (such as AI 
chips, electrical power, data…) instead of scientific insights. As tech giants and frontier AI 
companies collaborate to unlock ever more resources, the path forward leads to 
increasingly intelligent yet opaque AIs.
How far can this trend of smarter and smarter AI go? If we look for inspiration at how 
humanity has historically increased its intelligence (understood as its ability to solve more 
and more intellectual tasks), three strategies emerge: tools, groups, and methods. AIs can 
leverage the exact same strategies; indeed each of them is already being used by current 
AI R&D! And although skeptics claim that various hypothetical components of intelligence 
cannot be automated, no existing scientific theory of intelligence  backs these opinions. 
Thus we should assume the trend towards smarter AIs will continue, eventually leading to 
Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), AIs able to do the same intellectual tasks as humans.
Since AGI would be able to do anything a human can, it would notably be able to do AI 
research, and so to improve its own intelligence and capabilities. This is not the only way 
forward, yet AGI companies and AI researchers are already pushing hard in this direction. 
Since software is cheaper, more efficient, and easier to correct than brains, AGI would 
improve far faster than any human, eventually reaching artificial superintelligence (ASI) 
surpassing humanity’s collective intelligence. As it continues to scale, ASI would unlock 
abilities to shape matter and energy that would look godlike compared to human 
engineering. And even without malicious intent, these godlike-AIs would by default wipe 
out humanity as collateral damage while pursuing their own goals, in the same way ants are 
just collateral damage for contractors  building a house.
Godlike-AIs lead to catastrophe because of the incredible difficulty of aligning AI’s goals 
with those of a single human, let alone the goals of humanity in general. Alignment is the 
harder version of the kind of problems with which humanity already struggles: for example 
 The Compendium | 3 

Introduction
making companies and governments beneficial for what the actual citizens care for and 
believe in. Solving alignment would require massive progress on questions like finding what 
we value and reconciling contradictions between values, predicting the consequences of 
our actions to avoid unintended side-effects, and design processes from the people’s will 
to AIs doing the correct things. If we were serious about solving alignment, it would require 
at the very least decades of top-notch research and trillions of dollars of investment; yet 
only a handful of people and a couple 100s of millions are currently invested, with most of 
the money and effort going instead towards making AIs more powerful. Even worse, the 
little work that exists doesn’t even try to pay the cost of alignment: instead it reacts to 
current issues with AIs by patching them in a whack-a-mole fashion, and passes the buck 
to future smarter AIs. Thus we’re not on track to get anywhere near solving alignment, and 
thus godlike-AI would cause human extinction.
Lacking a solution to alignment, we need to ensure godlike-AIs are not built. This requires 
institutions with the authority to regulate frontier AI research, both at the national and 
international level. Yet these institutions simply do not exist, very little is being done to 
create them, and the little existing governance work already finds itself undermined by the 
very AI companies racing to AGI.
This lack of promising effort on alignment and regulation is not a coincidence: frontier AI 
companies are systematically undermining these to race to AGI without blockers. The root 
of this behavior lies in the ideologies of frontier AI companies: they are by and large 
utopists, who want to build AGI because they believe it will usher their ideal world. This 
belief brings with it a fear that AGI will be built by the “wrong” people,  and so these utopists 
become more and more willing to cut corners in order to avoid this, undermining safety 
along the way. In practice, this looks like the key tactics of the industry playbook used by 
Big Tech, Big Oil, and Big Tobacco: spreading fear (by stoking geopolitical fires) and doubt 
(by changing their stances constantly) to free their path to AGI, capturing regulatory efforts 
under cover of self-regulation, and undermining research that might force them to slow 
down.
So we are on a dark trajectory, one that recklessly leads to human extinction. What can be 
done about this? We believe that giving up and reading the situation as hopeless is a 
mistake, one that the utopists and other actors racing to AGI want us to make. Instead, 
there is a narrow path forward, one that starts with basic civic duty. The people racing 
towards AGI are only a tiny minority, who are deciding to put everyone at risk to follow their 
delusions. Because no one in their right mind wants humanity to go extinct, this is an issue 
that can unify people across party lines and countries. This starts by spreading the word 
and awareness of the risks, and exercising basic civic duty by contacting your 
representatives and voting according to the extinction risks posed by AI. 
 The Compendium | 4 

Introduction
(0) Introduction.
 Foreword.
A few million years ago, something very strange happened. 
Through minor genetic tweaks, an ancestor of the modern chimpanzee split into a new line 
of species: Homo, humans. This new chimp variant was odd in several ways: it learned to 
stand upright, lost most of its fur, and grew a bigger brain. This bigger brain was not really all 
that different from that of his chimp cousins, just scaled up by a factor of about three.
If you had seen this odd, half naked chimp with a brain three times bigger than its cousins’, 
and you would have to guess what this new chimp will do, what would you have said?
Maybe you would have expected it to be a bit better at collecting termites, or throwing 
rocks more accurately, or have more complicated status hierarchies. But that 3x scaled up 
chimp ends up building nuclear weapons and going to the moon. Chimps don’t go one 
third of the way to the moon, they go zero to the moon; humans go all the way. 
We still don’t exactly know how or why this happened, but whatever it is that happened, we 
call the result General Intelligence. It is what has allowed our species to build the magical 
glowing brick that you are looking at right now to transmit the words of another chimp 
descendant located halfway across the world to your eyes and brain. 
This is crazy.
General Intelligence is what separates human from animal, industrial civilization from 
chimpanzee band. It probably isn't a discrete all-or-nothing property, but it sure is 
suspicious that you go from “zero going to the moon” to “all of going to the moon” within a 
3x difference in brain size. Things can change quickly with scale.
Our intelligence makes us the masters of the planet. The future of chimpanzees is utterly 
dependent on what humans want to do with them. If we want to give them infinite food, 
incredible medicines they can’t hope to understand, and safety from any predators, we 
can. If we want to keep them in zoos, or hunt them for sport, we can. If we wanted them 
extinct, their habitats paved over with parking lots and solar cells, we could.
This kind of relationship, of complete domination over another, is the natural balance of 
power between a much more intelligent creature and a less intelligent one. It’s the kind of 
 The Compendium | 5 

Introduction
power an adult has over a small child, or an owner over their pet. The arrangement may or 
may not be beneficial to the weaker party, but ultimately, the more intelligent and powerful 
agent decides the future. A pet doesn’t get a say in whether they get spayed or not. 
Luckily, there are no other species out there running around that might be even smarter 
than us.
–
But that is changing.
Currently, the future belongs to humanity, for better or for worse. The planet and stars are 
ours to do with as we decide. If we want to drown ourselves in pollutants and a warming 
climate, we can. If we want to annihilate each other in nuclear war, we can. If we want to 
become responsible stewards of our environment, we can. If we want to build global 
abundance, limitless energy, interstellar travel, transcendent art and a rule of just law, we 
can. 
If a new, more intelligent species were to appear on Earth, humanity would surrender its 
choice over what future we want to make manifest. The future would be in the hands of the 
successor, and humanity would be relegated to a position no more admirable than the one 
chimpanzees inhabit today.
No such more intelligent species exist today, but they are being built.
Since its inception, the field of artificial intelligence has aspired to construct artificial minds 
as smart as, and then even smarter than, humans. If they succeed, and such systems are 
built, humanity will no longer be in control of the future, and the decisions will be in the 
hands of the machines.
–
If you don’t do something, it doesn’t happen.
This might seem so obvious it’s barely worth bringing up. Yet, you might be surprised how 
often people, probably including you, don’t really believe this. 
If we want the future to go well, someone needs to make it so. The default state of nature is 
chaos, competition, and conflict, not peace. Peace is a choice we must strive for, a 
delicate balance on the edge of entropy that must be lovingly and continuously maintained 
 The Compendium | 6 

Introduction
and strengthened. Good intentions are not enough — it demands calm, cooperative, and 
decisive action. 
 
This document is a guide to what is happening with AI, and offers a playbook for nudging 
the future into the direction you want it to go. It is not a solution, but a guide. A book cannot 
be a solution, only a person’s actions can.
What is AI? Who is building it? Why? And is it going to be a future we want? (Spoiler: No) 
There are so many things happening every single day in the field of AI, not to speak of 
geopolitics, that it seems impossible to keep up with, or to keep focused on what really 
matters: What kind of future do we want, for ourselves, and for our children?
We must steady our focus on this, and not let ourselves be distracted by all the noise and 
demoralizing nihilism pelting down on us from all sides. We need to understand where we 
want to go, chart a path there, and then walk this path. 
If we don’t do something, it doesn’t happen.
–
The default path we are on now is one of ruthless, sociopathic corporations racing toward 
building the most intelligent, powerful AIs as fast as possible to compete with one another 
and vie for monopolization and control of both the market and geopolitics. Without 
intervention, humanity will be summarily outcompeted and relegated to irrelevancy by such 
machines, as our chimp cousins were by us. 
A species of intelligent beings born from the crucible of sociopathic market and military 
competition will not be one of loving grace, and, for reasons we'll discuss in depth later on, 
will have far fewer qualms about paving over humanity’s habitat with solar cells and parking 
lots. Despite humanity’s flaws, we still have a heart, we have love, even for our chimpanzee 
cousins, somewhere, sometimes. Machines of ruthless competition need not have such 
hindrances.
And then that’s…it. Story over. Humanity is no more.
There is no one coming to save us. There is no benevolent watcher, no adults in the room, no 
superhero that will come to save the day. This is not that kind of story. The only thing 
necessary for the triumph of evil is for good people to do nothing. If you do nothing, evil 
triumphs, and that’s it. 
 The Compendium | 7 

Introduction
If you want a better ending for the Human Story, you must create it. Can we forge a good, 
humanist future, one that is just, prosperous, and leaves humanity sailing into a beautiful 
twilight, wherever its final destination may lie? Yes. But if you don’t do it, it doesn’t happen. 
The path we are on is one of going out with a whimper, not of humanist splendor. It is 
embarrassing to lose out on all of the future potential of humanity because of the 
shortsightedness and greed of a few. But it wouldn’t be surprising. A human story if there 
ever was one.
—
It isn't decided yet whether the Human Story ends here, but it will be decided soon. 
We hope you join us in writing a better ending.
-​
Connor Leahy, October 2024
 The Compendium | 8 

Introduction
 Overview.
In (1) The state of AI today – We do not understand the AI we are building, we 
contextualize the current state of AI, highlighting the recent trends and their potential 
downstream effects. ​
The pace of AI progress in the last decade has been extraordinary, driven by a brute-force 
paradigm — development does not require insight, but data, compute, and money. It has 
worked so well that many companies have shifted to pursuing AGI as their primary goal. 
Concerningly, researchers and engineers don’t need to understand how modern AI 
systems work in order to create them, and AIs have become increasingly powerful, 
mysterious, and unpredictable. Given this accelerated development, we and many experts 
anticipate the emergence of uncontrolled AGI in the next few years, leading to 
catastrophic risks for humanity.
In (2) Intelligence – Intelligence is mechanistic and AGI can be built, we discuss whether it 
is possible to recreate human-level intelligence in AGI, and conclude that it is. 
Intelligence broadly corresponds to the ability to solve intellectual tasks. Observing how 
humans have massively increased the range of intellectual tasks, we conclude that 
intelligence appears to be mechanistic. The primary arguments against intelligence being 
automatable thus rely on finding a mechanistic “missing component” that cannot be 
solved by AI. We fail to find any empirically validated missing component, and conclude 
that intelligence can and will be automated, leading to AGI. 
In (3) AI Catastrophe – Current AI research leads to godlike AI, we extrapolate what would 
happen if humanity created AGI, unfolding the consequences of our current approach to 
building AI, where AGI leads to an AI takeoff that ends in a catastrophic and permanent loss 
of control by humanity.
When we develop AGI, all intellectual tasks will be automatable, including software 
engineering tasks such as AI and machine learning development. Given that AI companies 
are aggressively pursuing that end, we expect that the creation of AGI will catalyze AI 
self-improvement, where AI can improve the range, power, and efficiency of AI, 
compounding far beyond humanity’s intelligence. This leads to a system which has 
developed such advanced powers that it’s better described as a “god” from the 
perspective of humanity. Because this godlike AI will be beyond our control, it will control 
the future and almost certainly obliterate humanity, not by spite but by indifference.
 The Compendium | 9 

Introduction
In (4) AI Safety – We are not on track to solve the hard problems of safety, we argue that 
controlling and directing godlike AI depends on solving AI “alignment,” and that we cannot 
do so in time.
In order to avoid catastrophe by godlike AI, we must achieve alignment by answering deep 
technical, moral, and philosophical questions that are more complex than any problem 
humanity has faced before. These questions are not neat mathematical problems but 
cross-disciplinary issues that will require major research programs to resolve, at least 
billions of dollars of investment, and decades of sequential work. Today’s research ignores 
these challenges, instead focusing on hacks and tricks to correct the most egregious 
mistakes without really addressing the underlying problems. We dismiss the naive claim 
that we can wait for AGI to solve this problem. On our current path, we do not expect to 
solve alignment in time, resulting in annihilation by godlike AI.
In (5) AI Governance – We lack the mechanisms to control technology development, we 
consider the institutions and mechanisms that would be necessary to steer us off the 
“default path” and prevent AGI from being built, and argue that these do not exist today. 
Lacking a technical safety solution, we must avert the “default path” through policy and 
governance means. Technical actors must be overseen by national regulators to control 
the safe development of AI, but these do not exist. Even if we collectively did want to slow 
or stop the development of AI technology, the physical (e.g compute kill-switches) and 
policy levers, do not exist. International stability must be maintained through 
high-bandwidth communication lines and multinational agreements enforced by 
international law, but these do not exist. And no single individual, institution, or collective 
has a comprehensive plan for how to handle AGI. We argue that the lack of effective efforts 
stems directly from AGI companies, who have captured governance and research efforts, 
and aggressively pushed policies of self-regulation that keep them in control without 
averting danger.
In (6) The AI Race – The race to AGI is ideological, we explore the history and present day 
realities of the race to AGI, making sense of the adversarial social dynamics that currently 
plague the field.
Although the race to AGI often presents itself under an economic or geopolitical mantle, its 
original motivation is ideological: all relevant actors care about building AGI, be it to bring 
about utopia, gain power, or build god. Yet the main companies racing to AGI, who want to 
build it to foster their view of utopia, end up in fear that someone else will beat them to the 
post. This fear in turn creates a dynamic where only the actors willing to compromise and 
undermine safety stay in the race. Thus it is not surprising to see that AGI companies are 
 The Compendium | 10 

Introduction
using the full industry playbook, using fear, uncertainty, and doubt (FUD) to capture 
regulation and research, turning every argument into a justification to race even faster. 
Since these tactics are currently working for them, we expect them to continue in this line, 
and thus the race to AGI to further accelerate.
In (7) A good future, if you can keep it, we argue that we must urgently work to avert the 
“default path” to extinction, and suggest that civic duty is what is needed today to reduce 
the risk. 
The primary way to avoid the default trajectory towards AI extinction risk is to not build AGI, 
as this is a point of no return. But to reach this level of control, we must first build global 
common knowledge of the risks and global communities capable of responding. These do 
not exist yet, and bottleneck larger solutions like the need to implement global regulations, 
stabilize international governance, and end the race to AGI. To get there, we must build up 
from small, local actions that engage in existing civic processes, and – where these fail – 
create new ones.
In (8) Outro, we close with a brief message about the challenge ahead of us.
 
 The Compendium | 11 

The State of AI Today
 (1) The state of AI today.
Artificial Intelligence became mainstream after the release of ChatGPT in November 2022.  
Google search popularity of “Artificial Intelligence” from 2004-present. 
ChatGPT set the record for fastest-growing user base of all time, exceeding 100M users in 
less than two months, and demonstrating to the world that AI can now generate coherent 
answers and solve problems that previously felt far out of reach.
Expectedly, the AI discourse has become heated and polarized. Commentary ranges from 
“AGI is around the corner” to “AI is overhyped.” Google employees debate whether AI is 
“becoming conscious” or just “parroting humans.” Those expecting rapid progress take 
sides on whether AI will spell humanity’s “doom” or “salvation.” Because opinions diverge 
so wildly, newcomers to AI often find it difficult to even start to make sense of the 
discourse. 
We believe that three key facts cut through today’s polarized conversation, and make it 
clear that the modern AI era is concerning:
In Rapid AI progress is driven by resources, not insights, we highlight that modern AI 
capabilities are driven not by individual research breakthroughs, but by a simple paradigm 
that scales with more data, compute, and energy, and that the resources to push AI much 
further are being invested.
In AI is grown, not built, we explain how deep learning, the core method underpinning the 
last decade of AI progress, leads to AI systems that researchers can neither understand nor 
fully control. 
In The race to AGI is on, and potentially deadly, we argue that the core actors developing AI 
today are ideologically driven to build AGI, technology that experts warn may lead to 
extinction. 
 The Compendium | 12 

The State of AI Today
 Rapid AI progress is driven by resources, not insights.
AI capabilities have dramatically improved in the past three years, crossing crucial 
thresholds of competence in domains such as coding, verbal communication, abstract 
reasoning, image recognition and generation, vocal simulation, planning, and autonomous 
execution and refinement. 
The trendlines comparing AI and human test scores show striking progress: AI is now better 
at image recognition and reading comprehension than most humans, and approaching 
near-human performance in domains that were thought to be out of reach, such as 
predictive reasoning, code generation, and math.  
Graphic from OurWorldInData showing AI capabilities improvements over time 
Test scores are a contentious predictor of AI's actual capabilities, but businesses are 
nevertheless adopting AI, suggesting that AI performance is not superficial. Five years ago, 
few businesses claimed to use AI; today, nearly 65% of all businesses use it to perform 
some cognitive labor. Perhaps most notably, AI can now code well enough to significantly 
accelerate the work of even the best human coders — Y Combinator startups use AI to write 
between 40%-90% of their code, a job that would typically require a three- or four-year 
STEM degree or equivalent self-education.  
 The Compendium | 13 

The State of AI Today
This massive jump in capabilities was driven by resources, not insights.
Historically, AI development has been punctuated by AI summers and winters – periods of 
rapid progress, followed by periods of stagnation. While past AI summers were driven by 
algorithmic breakthroughs, recent advancements have been driven by scale1: more 
high-quality data, more training time, and more money is all it takes to build ever more 
powerful systems. 
In the last five years alone, the GPT models that underpin OpenAI’s ChatGPT have gone 
from useless to groundbreaking purely through scaling. When GPT-1 was released in 2018, 
it could merely write grammatically correct sentences. GPT-2 (2019) could write prose, 
poetry, and metaphor. GPT-3 (2020) could write stories, with characters that maintain 
coherence over time. Today, GPT-4 can pass college-level exams on the first try, support 
complex legal work, and personalize language learning.
This has significant implications for the future of AI progress, because it means that 
resources are the only obstacle to greater capabilities. Forecasts show that in terms of 
power, chips, data, and latency, there is ample room to grow, at least until 2030. 
1 This has been dubbed "the bitter lesson" by Richard Sutton, one of the fathers of modern 
Reinforcement Learning: the idea that scaling through general methods is ultimately much more 
effective to increase AI capabilities than relying on the ingenuity of the researchers.
 The Compendium | 14 

The State of AI Today
The most likely and proximal blocker is power consumption (data-centers training modern 
AIs use enormous amounts of electricity, up to the equivalent of the yearly consumption of 
1000 average US households) and chip production capacity (AI relies on graphic 
processing units (GPUs), which are specialized circuits that can perform high-speed 
calculations).
In response, there have been coordinated investments to support AI development. 
Google, Amazon, and Microsoft are partnering with frontier AI companies to funnel billions 
of dollars toward scaling, in turn providing them with the necessary compute power; new 
compute companies are raising billions from private equity. Microsoft and OpenAI are 
investing $10 billion into renewable energy sources to power them; others are buying up 
nuclear power.
To avert future chip shortages and supply chain failures, the US government has committed 
to investing in domestic semiconductor development and embargoed GPUs from being 
sold to China in a trade war move to keep the US ahead on AI. Incumbent GPU manufacturer 
Nvidia has shifted its focus to optimizations for AI, making it the highest market-cap 
company in the world by November 2024, at more than $3 trillion valuation. xAI already has 
a 100 000 GPU cluster online, and Meta claims to be training their latest models on an even 
bigger one. OpenAI is raising billions to support continued development and fund 
compute requirements.
There is also a burgeoning market for training data: media companies are selling their data 
for hundreds of millions of dollars, and custom dataset providers are raising billions to hire 
human labellers to effectively offload humanity’s knowledge into datasets that raise the 
waterline for AI capabilities. Already, the massive scale and collective efforts toward 
pursuing more advanced models have helped the systems move down the cost curve, and 
training will continue to get cheaper as the technology scales.2
What this all means is that the world is investing in an approach to AI that assumes the only 
requirement to further AI progress is more resources (chips, power, data…). If this thesis 
holds true, then we should expect that AI in five years will be orders-of-magnitude more 
powerful than today’s AI, just as GPT’s capabilities improved from barely coherent to 
college-level performance simply due to scale.
2  The biggest GPT-2 model (1.5B parameters) cost an estimated $43,000 to train in 2019; today it is 
possible to train a 350M parameters GPT-2 for $200 in 14 hours. Paul Graham mentions an estimate 
that the ratio of training price by performance decreased 100x in each of the last two years, or 
10000x in two years.
 The Compendium | 15 

The State of AI Today
 AI is grown, not built.
Traditional software is coded line-by-line by engineers, who need to understand broadly 
how the program works.
In contrast, modern AI models are developed using deep learning, a technique that feeds 
neural networks troves of data to train them to recognize patterns and make predictions. A 
neural network is essentially a large graph of billions of numbers that encodes a 
program.Human engineers are completely unable to determine all of these numbers by 
hand themselves, so instead they automate the process.
The numbers are initially chosen at random. Then some piece of data is fed to the neural 
network, and its answer is checked against the correct one. If the answer was incorrect, an 
automated program twiddles with the numbers to nudge the output of the neural network 
closer to the correct answer. This is repeated trillions of times using data that often includes 
significant portions of the internet and public libraries until the neural network is very good 
at producing correct answers.
Although this sounds straightforward, the resulting AIs are incredibly complex, and able to 
do things far beyond what they were trained to do. As an important example, large 
language models (LLMs) such as OpenAI’s GPT4 and Anthropic’s Claude are trained only to 
predict the next few characters in text, over a huge portion of the internet and books 
available. Yet from that apparently simple prediction task emerged wild capabilities, such 
as being able to tell jokes, analyze complex legal documents, and write software.
These capabilities are “grown” in the sense that they are not built deliberately into the 
model by programmers, but rather emerge from patterns in large amounts of data. This 
presents two significant consequences:
●​ We don’t need understanding to grow powerful AI. Deep learning unlocked the 
current AI scaling paradigm, in which AI progress is constrained by resources rather 
than insights. Programmers don’t need to come up with clever new solutions 
themselves. Instead, they can use the same deep learning algorithms over and over, 
simply feeding in more high quality data to larger systems.3
3 This is not saying that ML researchers and engineers don't have specialized knowledge and skills. 
Only that their expertise is now about how to tweak the training methods to grow better AIs, not on 
understanding how the AI (or even the training process) work.
 The Compendium | 16 

The State of AI Today
●​ We don’t understand powerful AI. Today we are building AI systems which we do 
not fundamentally understand and cannot predict the capabilities of, a complete 
divergence from how all other code is written by and legible to developers.
Modern AI systems have been referred to as “black boxes.” Unlike inspecting ordinary 
code, inspecting a neural network offers little insight into how it works, and the graphs of 
billions of numbers are largely inscrutable to humans. The field of AI interpretability has 
emerged in an attempt to understand AI models and explain their behavior, much like how 
neuroscience studies the brain. But despite some encouraging progress, interpretability is 
unable to make sense even of large models from a few years ago like GPT2, and nowhere 
near completely understanding current LLMs such as GPT4 and Claude. 
Not only are researchers and engineers unable to understand how grown AI systems work, 
but they are also unable to predict what they will be able to do before they are trained.
Many experts have placed bets on AI’s limitations, only to be proven wrong when the next 
generation of model is released. Bryan Caplan, an economist known for placing winning 
bets, wagered that an AI system would not be able to score an “A” (the best possible grade) 
on 5 out of 6 of his exams by January 2029. He based his prediction on the fact that the 
original ChatGPT release scored a “D” in 2023; just a few months later, GPT-4 received the 
4th highest grade in the class. 
This is just one of multiple such mispredictions: 
●​ Francois Chollet, an AI researcher and author of a machine learning textbook, 
released a benchmark that many thought would be impossible for an LLM to solve, 
only for an LLM to achieve a score comparable to human performance just days 
later. 
●​ Yann LeCun, one of the three “godfathers of AI,” predicted that LLMs would not be 
capable of spatial reasoning. He was proven wrong within a year. 
●​ AI Safety pioneers Paul Christiano and Eliezer Yudkowsky bet that there was only an 
8%-16% chance that an AI system would score gold on the International Math 
Olympiad by the end of 2025, but in July 2024, DeepMind’s AI system scored silver, 
challenging this forecast and shocking prediction markets. 
●​ A group of professional forecasters hired by ML expert Jacob Steinhardt predicted 
in 2021 that a year later, the best score on the MATH dataset would be 12.7%; the 
actual result was 50.3%. OpenAI’s recently released o1 model scored 94.8%. 
All of this leads to AI research where researchers assess the capabilities of AI models after 
they are trained, using benchmarks and hiring engineers to red-team the models. The 
outcomes can be concerning: a red-team testing GPT-4 found that it is capable of hiring a 
human to help it solve a CAPTCHA, a capability that was not tested for during training. Or 
 The Compendium | 17 

The State of AI Today
during Anthropic’s training of Claude 3, the model seemed to exhibit awareness that it was 
being tested by researchers, something that the researcher had “never seen before from 
an LLM.”
What makes the situation harder to assess is that after an AI is released, more of its 
impressive capabilities get revealed by scaffolding techniques that extend AI capabilities 
even further; this means that the initial release demonstrates only the lower bound on what 
the system can do. For example, ChatGPT has learned to play complex open-world video 
games like Red Dead Redemption 2, which was not an obvious capability even after the 
initial tests.
All in all, this means that the AIs being created and released are not understandable right 
now by anyone, not even the companies and researchers working on them. This is because 
they are grown rather than built. And as AIs grow in power, they will become even more 
complex, mysterious, and illegible.
 The race to AGI is on, and potentially deadly.
The main companies driving AI progress today are racing to build Artificial General 
Intelligence (AGI), AI systems as smart as humans. These companies are all using the same 
methods discussed above: scaling up deep learning and investing billions of dollars into 
private data centers and large training runs. 
DeepMind, founded in 2010, was the first company to try to build general-purpose AI. 
Google acquired DeepMind in 2014, and today the Google DeepMind team builds next 
generation AI systems, acknowledging that “AI — and ultimately artificial general 
intelligence — has the potential to drive one of the greatest transformations in history.” 
OpenAI, creator of ChatGPT, has been pursuing AGI since its inception. OpenAI was 
founded in 2015 after a dispute over the future of AGI spurred Elon Musk to launch a 
competitor to DeepMind. Since then, Microsoft has partnered with and acquired a 49% 
stake in OpenAI.
Musk eventually left OpenAI, but has once again taken up pursuing AGI with xAI, which has 
built the powerful LLM Grok. In a Twitter Space, Musk allegedly said xAI’s goal is to build 
“AGI with the purpose of understanding the universe.”
Anthropic, creator of the top-performing AI Claude, is also publicly racing for AGI. 
Anthropic was established in 2021 after founder Dario Amodei and OpenAI CEO Sam 
Altman had a breakdown in trust over the future of AGI. Today Anthropic has a $1-4B 
 The Compendium | 18 

The State of AI Today
partnership with AWS, and while AWS has not made public statements on AGI, they have an 
internal AGI team and recently bought out the founders of $350M-funded Adept to join it.
Meta, which has released the largest open-weight4 AI models, was previously quiet on AGI, 
but CEO Mark Zuckerberg announced in January 2024 that Meta is now pursuing AGI as 
well.
Competition to train powerful AI models has mostly consolidated among these actors, 
although  new players are jumping in, like Safe Superintelligence Inc., a new start-up by Ilya 
Sutskever, 
ex-Chief 
Scientist 
at 
OpenAI, 
which 
raised $1B to explicitly train 
smarter-than-human AIs.
Nearly every AI application today is downstream of these major companies. Foundation 
models are so named for a reason: they form the foundation for other AI applications. This 
means that the core risks inherent to these models, such as the fact that researchers do not 
understand how they work, apply to every AI application that uses them.
In addition, the push to make AIs open-weight – releasing the weights of these AIs on the 
internet – by tech giants like Meta and newcomers like Mistral AI creates a dangerous 
ecosystem where everybody (criminals, terrorists, rogue states…) has unmonitored access5 
to these powerful systems for whatever purpose (scams, hacks, propaganda…). This is 
particularly problematic because of the asymmetry of the situation: governments and 
law-enforcement need to defend everywhere against the assaults of nefarious actors, 
whereas it takes only one successful malicious actor to create a mess.
As these models become ever more powerful, and orders of magnitude more complex 
with scale, older generations can be replaced by new and improved systems, meaning that 
the entire AI industry (and the open-weight ecosystem) becomes increasingly powerful 
and opaque with each release.
We believe that this is a recipe for catastrophe, and we’re not the only ones. After ChatGPT 
was released in 2023, global conversation on the risks from AI – including extinction – 
entered the mainstream.
In May 2023, the Center for AI Safety released an open “Statement on AI Risk,” 
5 Although a lot of these AIs require high-end chips that are expensive and regulated, the online 
community is investing massive efforts to bypass these constraints, allowing people to run almost 
state-of-the-art AIs on a single macbook.
4 We use “open-weight” rather than “open-source” because the AIs released by Meta and Mistral AI 
are lacking many essential parts of an open-source release. Notably, these companies don’t release 
the data these AIs were trained on, nor do they share the training algorithms used to grow them. As 
we will see, this nullifies the potential benefits of open-source software.
 The Compendium | 19 

The State of AI Today
Mitigating the risk of extinction from AI should be a global priority alongside other 
societal-scale risks such as pandemics and nuclear war.
The letter was signed by hundreds of signatories, including the CEOs of OpenAI, 
DeepMind, and Anthropic, two of the three “godfathers of AI,” weapons experts, 
politicians, and academics. 
A few months before that, a similar open letter was published by the Future of Life Institute, 
calling for a pause on “Giant AI Experiments,” a 6-month ban on training AI models more 
powerful than GPT-4. It has garnered over 33,000 signatures, including Elon Musk’s.  
In June 2023, a survey conducted at the Yale CEO Summit found that 42% of CEOs said 
that AI has the potential to destroy humanity in 5-10 years. 
In November 2023, at the first global summit on AI, a consortium of world leaders from the 
USA, China, EU, and other global powers signed the Bletchley Declaration, which 
acknowledges the “potential for serious, even catastrophic, harm, either deliberate or 
unintentional, stemming from the most significant capabilities of these AI models.” 
Following the summit, the UK, US, Japan, France, Germany, Italy, Singapore, South Korea, 
Australia, Canada, and the European Union have agreed to establish AI Safety Institutes 
with a mandate to better understand and mitigate risks from frontier AI.
Why are AI experts, CEOs, and world leaders concerned that AI is an existential threat? 
In short, extrapolating the trends of AI progress into the near future paints a grim 
picture: humanity has unlocked the ability to build powerful AI systems without 
fundamentally understanding them, and we are poised to enter a future with more 
powerful and dangerous technology that is less and less under our control. 
If this technology is able to meet, and eventually exceed, the capabilities of a human, then 
we may face a world where we are powerless to control the very AI we have created. 
This document presents a worldview that leads us to this claim and unfolds the 
consequences: humanity may end up extinct unless we intervene today.
 The Compendium | 20 

Intelligence
 (2) Intelligence.
Intelligence is mechanistic and it is possible to build AGI.
Evaluating the existential risk of AI centers on the feasibility of building Artificial General 
Intelligence (AGI), an AI that rivals human capabilities. The debate about whether AI can be 
considered truly “intelligent” first requires establishing a definition of intelligence. 
We contend that intelligence consists of intellectual tasks, which are self-contained 
problems such as planning, summarizing, generating ideas, or calculation, that must be 
solved to achieve a goal. We solve these tasks through intellectual work, which is similar to 
the notion of work in physics. For example, solving a difficult research problem takes more 
intellectual work than solving a simple addition problem – it requires more hours of thought, 
more calculations, and more experimentation.
By considering intelligence as the intellectual tasks it is composed of we arrive at a 
mechanistic model, where the question of whether we can create AGI is not “can we 
recreate human intelligence?” but rather “can we automate all intellectual tasks?” To which 
we say: yes.
●​ In What is intelligence?, we argue that intelligence is the ability to solve intellectual 
tasks. Humanity has expanded the range of feasible tasks by mechanistic means, 
specifically through the usage of tools, groups and specialization, and improved 
methods of thought.
●​ In Applications to artificial intelligence, we demonstrate that AI capabilities can 
similarly expand, and that an AI capable of automating all human-manageable 
intellectual tasks is functionally an AGI. 
●​ In Against arguments of AI limitations, we argue against the notion that there is a 
missing component of intelligence that will prevent AI from rivaling human 
intelligence. We show how the “AI Effect” has led to shifting the goalposts of “real 
artificial intelligence,” leading to pseudoscientific discourse. 
●​ In Thus, AGI, we conclude that even if we account for uncertainty, the rapid 
expansion of AI capabilities and the absence of known limitations can lead to AGI, 
and that we must proceed with caution. 
 The Compendium | 21 

Intelligence
 What is intelligence?.
Intelligence is not yet a hard science that we can study mathematically and base 
predictions on. As a result, most definitions of intelligence are imprecise, but converge on 
some combination of processing information and responding accordingly in pursuit of a 
goal. Intelligence seems to be what makes one human “smarter” than another and 
differentiates humans from the rest of the animal kingdom. A complex piece of technology 
demonstrates intelligence, and we understand it to be man-made: nothing else we know of 
can similarly rearrange nature. Whatever “intelligence” is, it has enabled humans to 
dominate Earth.
This ability has evolved over millennia; humans have gone from struggling to survive by 
hiding in caves and hunting beasts, to going to space, curing a vast range of diseases, and 
producing enough food to sustain 8 billion people (if it were distributed equally). Human 
intelligence grew as a result of three primary factors:
●​ Tools: We have created tools that capture the ability to solve specific tasks, and 
make it possible to solve them with much less knowledge, understanding, and 
competence.
●​ Groups: We split complex intellectual tasks (such as designing an airplane) into 
many smaller ones, which are further distributed across multiple people, allowing for 
parallelization and specialization.
●​ Methods: We have improved our methods to solve intellectual tasks, such as 
developing the scientific method and other means to account for biases and 
systematic sources of errors.
By looking at the three factors that have most increased human intelligence, we can bypass 
abstract theorizations and directly examine what has made us more capable: simple 
mechanistic processes that could be replicated with the right software.
Tools 
Our inventions and tools have played a critical role in our intellectual and societal growth. 
Physical tools, such as writing implements, enabled preserving knowledge across 
generations, leading to complex societies. The printing press democratized knowledge by 
making books more accessible, expanding literacy. Tools let humans offload intellectual 
tasks — before modern computers and calculators, “computers” were humans who 
performed calculations by hand. Today, the intellectual work is distributed between the 
human and the calculator. 
Critically, solving a task is a composition of distributed, physical processes: the brain 
apprehends the question and the need to solve it, triggering a nerve impulse that travels to 
 The Compendium | 22 

Intelligence
our fingers and leads us to punch keys on a calculator, which in turn moves internal digits to 
compute an answer, display it on the screen, return photons to our eyes, and carry nerve 
impulses to the brain to signal that we have answered the question. When we think about 
intelligence this way we can see that it is not something that just happens in the brain. 
The processes we use to solve intellectual tasks have co-evolved with our tools. Before 
smartphones and GPS systems, navigation required a physical map; today, increased 
reliance on navigation systems means that fewer people own maps, or even know how to 
use one. As technology encodes the intellectual processes that were once essential for 
survival, we no longer use or develop the requisite skills ourselves.
Without our tools, we would not just be uncomfortable, we would be handicapped. 
Without language, literacy, or numeracy, it’s not just that we couldn’t speak, remember, or 
calculate; it’s that we couldn’t think. Without written language, we could not preserve 
information except by memorization. Without language at all, we would have no internal 
monologue. What would our “intelligence” be like then? 
Groups 
Population scale and specialization have helped expand humanity’s intelligence. If more 
people work on a problem, there is more intellectual work being directed toward solving it. 
Today, we have nearly 8 billion humans thinking about stuff. 
There are a whole lot more thinking humans today than ever before.
 The Compendium | 23 

Intelligence
If intelligence is a matter of solving intellectual tasks, then having more people to distribute 
them across helps it grow. Consider the task of finding a cure for cancer – while an 
individual researcher may discover a breakthrough drug, this achievement will have 
depended on intellectual work performed by many different humans: collaborating with 
researchers, reading the papers of predecessors, running experiments with interns, and so 
on. 
Just as intellectual work is distributed across individuals and tools, it is also shared across 
groups like school departments, companies, internet subcultures, markets, governments, 
and international bodies. These groups can be thought of as intelligent entities with 
coordinated goals and processes for sensing, thinking, communicating, and surviving. For 
example, Airbus has the goal of building airplanes, senses and responds to events like 
changes in market conditions, thinks and communicates through its employees and the 
tools they use, and aims to survive and grow by building airplanes and outcompeting the 
market. The law even treats groups as single entities: states and companies are considered 
agentic enough to have liabilities, form contracts, and own property and debt. 
Companies like Airbus are much smarter than any individual because they can solve more 
complex intellectual tasks than any single human could. States are more intelligent than 
companies (although Big Tech is challenging this now) because they can be thought of as 
performing the economic work of all of the companies within their jurisdiction. In general, 
groups are more intelligent than individuals because they can solve tasks that are too 
complex for an individual to solve alone.
Methods 
Intelligence has also grown within an individual. This was not the result of evolution — a few 
thousand years is a relatively short time frame in evolutionary terms, and the human brain 
has remained largely unchanged since the advent of Homo sapiens around 200,000 years 
ago. 
It is our thinking — the software and methods of intelligence — that has evolved. 
While we consider humans to be the most intelligent species on Earth, we also know that 
we are fallible. Our memory is terrible and our learning is slow. Most of us are profoundly 
irrational, believing contradictory things and failing to use logic, and we can be incoherent 
and operate contrary to our goals. We are not always agentic — we fail to consistently plan 
and follow our own goals and end up stuck. All-in-all, we have many shortcomings.
 The Compendium | 24 

Intelligence
Over the last several thousand years, we have discovered techniques to circumvent some 
of these shortcomings and grow our individual intelligence.6 Logic, mathematics, and 
science structure our thinking into correspondence with reality; psychology and therapy 
aim to correct psychological mistakes that lead to individual failures. Formal education 
strives to teach people how to learn and correct their own mistakes. Improving our 
methods in turn helps us solve intellectual tasks more effectively.
A mechanistic model of intelligence
We have shown that humanity’s intelligence has grown as a result of tools, scale, and 
improvements to thinking methods. These are concrete, mechanistic factors, suggesting 
that intelligence is not a mysterious force in the brain, but rather a systematic, distributed 
process across physical entities.
The world is composed of processes that solve intellectual tasks. Solving a complex 
calculation is a coordinated process between a human and a calculator. At a larger scale, 
shipping fulfillment is a coordinated process between a customer, their computer, an 
algorithm that handles the purchase, a physical warehouse with the item, employees who 
process the order, shipping companies, and so on. The same is true for much more 
complex tasks, such as building a rocket, or state functions such as diplomacy, policy 
implementation, or adjusting the treasury rate. An entity’s intelligence is a measure of the 
intellectual tasks it can perform. 
It follows that to create an AI that rivals human intelligence, it simply needs to be capable of 
performing the same intellectual tasks. If all intellectual tasks are automatable, then 
intelligence itself is automatable. 
 Applications to artificial intelligence.
If intelligence is the mechanistic completion of intellectual tasks, then what has made 
humans intelligent is trivial to recreate in artificial intelligence — tool use, scaling and 
collective intelligence, and improving methods are all available to AI. 
Tools: Today’s AI is able to use online tools. Because large AI models have learned how to 
use natural language, they have also learned how to code, which allows them to use APIs to 
use tools and other interfaces. Shortly after the release of ChatGPT, OpenAI developed 
plugins to support using APIs, and the technology has only improved since. For example, 
6 One of the massive benefits of these methods is that they can be applied without understanding 
exactly how to rederive them. Most people applying various scientific methods would struggle to 
rederive them, but they don't need to.
 The Compendium | 25 

Intelligence
open-source project ToolBench has collected over 16,000 APIs that AI models can interact 
with.
Tool use transforms an LLM into a meaningful agent that can complete tasks. For example, 
Voyager is an open-source project that shows that GPT-4 can inherently play Minecraft — 
researchers connected the LLM to a text representation of the game and showed that it is 
capable of navigating environments and solving complex tasks by writing small programs 
for skills to “mine,” “craft,” and “move.” Just as humans solve intellectual tasks in Minecraft 
through processes that trace through our brain, the computer, the game environment, and 
back, so too can Voyager solve problems through processes that coordinate the LLM, the 
computer, and the game environment API.
The range of physical and virtual environments an AI can navigate is growing. FigureAI and 
other robotics companies are training advanced AI models to perform domestic tasks and 
navigate warehouses. AdeptAI and other research companies are training advanced AI 
models to navigate computer interfaces. Once these problems are solved, all human tools 
and environments will become available to AI. Considering the impact of tool use on 
improving human intelligence, this will be a significant lever to increasing the overall 
intelligence of AI. 
 The Compendium | 26 

Intelligence
Specialization and scale: Compared to human population growth, it is trivial to scale AI — 
we can make multiple copies by simply opening new browser windows. Researchers are 
working on agent frameworks to allow AIs to communicate with each other. Should we find 
more robust frameworks, AI will benefit from the advantages of group intelligence and 
distributing intellectual labor. We can already see this in action: Deepmind’s AlphaProof 
and AlphaGeometry systems achieved an IMO silver medal by generating thousands of 
“candidate” answers and assessing them in parallel, akin to a large group of math students 
dividing up proofs and manually reviewing them. Parallelization also leads to efficiency 
gains: distributing the work leads to faster solutions than sequential processing. 
Scale can enable the growth of AI’s capabilities in the same way that it has for humanity. If 
we build an AGI that is as smart as a single human, we could theoretically scale it to rival 
humanity’s collective intelligence by creating and coordinating billions of copies. This is a 
big deal, as it suggests that there is no “secret” to scaling from AGI to superintelligent 
entities.
Methods: AIs are programs. In the same way that we have expanded individual intelligence 
by improving our own methods and programming, we can improve the programs that AIs 
run. If we can create an AI that can perform each intellectual task that a human can, then we 
can compose those tasks into processes that mimic the intelligence of a human, a 
company, or even humanity. 
Today, AI companies are chipping away at these tasks, solving meaningful problems in 
language use and multimodality, search, planning, and inference. Many of these are 
solvable with traditional code that does not require AI, such as the applications we use on 
our phones. AI can also solve these tasks, and each successive model grows in its 
capabilities.  If a task is unsolved by a base model, engineers often build extensions 
through finetuning, scaffolding, and other means.
Whenever we find a programmatic way to solve a task using AI, that process can be 
distributed to other AIs far faster than we can distribute new skills across humans — every 
application that used GPT-3 as a base model made an immediate stepwise improvement 
when upgraded to GPT-4. While it may take humans hundreds of years to improve our 
collective rationality, the discovery of a post-processing method to reduce AI 
hallucinations could be rolled out in days.7 
7 Consider that updating and deploying anything made of atoms (physical products and 
infrastructure) is much more costly and slow than updating and deploying anything made of bits 
(software).
 The Compendium | 27 

Intelligence
Today’s AI research is aimed at automating all of the intellectual tasks that humans currently 
perform. The system that can solve all of those tasks will be an AGI. 
 Against arguments of AI limitations.
We have shown that expanding intelligence is a mechanistic process, and that it is possible 
to build AGI using the same techniques that have augmented humanity’s collective 
intelligence.
And yet, many people do not intuitively have the feeling that AI is “intelligent,” or anything 
other than a tool. Though AIs are increasingly autonomous, able to navigate environments, 
“think” chains of thought, and master language which enables “general” performance 
across many domains, public perception writes these off as mere components of 
intelligence, suggesting that AI is missing something that would make it the “real thing.” 
Many reject the existential risks of AI because of the intuition that AI is missing a 
fundamental component of intelligence. 
This section explores whether there is in fact a missing component of intelligence that we 
cannot automate, and that will therefore impede AGI. We argue against the existence of a 
missing component, showing that the historical tendency has been to shift the goalposts 
around the definition of intelligence every time AI is able to perform a novel task. We also 
consider broader theories of intelligence, disproving theoretical justifications for “missing 
components” arguments.
The AI Effect
Before establishing a solid theory about how something works, the mechanism can seem 
“magic,” and beyond the confines of science and reason. In AI, this phenomenon is 
common enough to be termed as the “AI Effect” — once AI achieves a new capability, it is 
dismissed as an aspect of intelligence. 
For example, in the early days of computer science and AI, memory was an unsolved 
problem. It was not clear how to best store and retrieve information, which plays a role in 
general intelligence. We have since developed databases, filesystems, querying 
languages, and other tools that “solve” most memory problems, but we wouldn’t consider 
an SQL database to be intelligent, despite its extremely sophisticated abilities to store and 
retrieve complex memories.
 The Compendium | 28 

Intelligence
This is a recurring pattern. Chess was once considered the pinnacle of human intelligence, 
but AI has been able to significantly outperform the best humans since 1997.8 Logic 
systems have solved mechanical reasoning. Classifiers are now able to infer patterns from 
data as well as humans can, and we now class linear regression and other statistical 
methods as “data science,” not AI. AI can increasingly manage tasks that we consider 
demonstrative of intelligence, but we do not yet consider AI itself to be intelligent. 
It is important to track these improvements as progress towards general intelligence. 
Computer memory, chess bots, and good classifiers do not “solve” intelligence, but they 
each get us one step closer by automating a vital intellectual task. Now that AI can solve 
PhD-level problems, the number of tasks AI cannot perform is few and getting smaller by 
the day, suggesting an overall trend toward more and more automation of intellectual 
tasks. 
Because of this trend, one should be wary of arguments that claim general intelligence is a 
discrete milestone that some “missing component” prevents us from reaching.  
While deep learning seems more impervious to the AI Effect because of its inscrutability, 
this illegibility feeds into myths around the missing component of intelligence, leading 
some to believe that because we don’t understand deep learning, we must be missing 
something profound about the nature of intelligence. For example, even scientific experts 
have suggested that planning, consciousness, reasoning, and inferring new patterns are all 
missing components that we must solve before we have AGI.9 
Let’s dig into one of these examples to demonstrate the shape of the “missing 
component” argument and how it falls apart on inspection. 
One proposed refutation of AI’s intelligence is that AI is not capable of planning. At first 
glance, this might seem reasonable: we do not yet have long-lived robots that make plans 
in the real world and interact with people, and when asked, ChatGPT’s plans are mediocre. 
Yann LeCun argues that LLMs are inherently reactive systems that cannot plan or engage in 
long-term strategic thinking, and therefore are missing one of the “four key ingredients for 
intelligence.”
9 The most common argument against AGI is that AI is not yet conscious. Fortunately we don’t need 
to enter the quagmire which is the field of consciousness studies, because the one thing everyone 
seems to agree on is that we do not have a good theory of consciousness. If it were the missing 
component, our theories still wouldn’t be able to tell us anything useful about AI. And for our 
purposes, an AI capable of automating all intellectual tasks would not need to be conscious to be 
functional and dangerous
8 When DeepBlue beat reigning world chess champion Garry Kasparov in a series of six games.
 The Compendium | 29 

Intelligence
But let’s consider what “planning” actually is: the ability to devise a sequence of actions in 
order to reach a goal. We understand the pragmatic vision of planning quite well. The entire 
field of traditional AI is about planning, from general algorithms like backward chaining to 
more specific subfields like scheduling. Today, one can ask ChatGPT to plan for any 
situation; it often fails because it lacks topical knowledge and not because of an inability to 
plan, but this is also true for people. Current engineering efforts are focused on agent 
architectures that are fundamentally predicated on planning, such as powerful 
game-playing AIs like Voyager and Cradle, or Devin, which aim to replace software 
engineers. AI’s search capability is also very well studied, and demonstrated by AI’s ability 
to solve mazes, look many moves ahead in chess, and consider battlefield tactics. For more 
technical readers, there is some early evidence of neural networks learning to search at an 
intuitive level, in a single forward pass.
Why are planning and search sometimes held up as the next big breakthrough in AI, despite 
the fact that AI is already capable of both?
In short, this is a common fallacy where a distinction is made between a “true capability” 
and mere imitations/parroting. Such arguments fail to see that any capability such as 
planning is simply an intellectual task, made of smaller intellectual tasks. There is no 
massive breakthrough to reach, only more and more tasks to automate. 
To put this another way: the “missing component” argument is not actually pointing to a 
real thing at all. Yes, the argument does identify certain limitations of what today’s AI are 
capable of doing. But when broken down to investigate why or what exactly AI cannot do, 
the question dissolves. All we find is that we are making incremental traction on planning, 
and that we’ve automated many components of it and have some more to go. What we 
certainly do not find is a mystical threshold we would need to cross over to get to “true 
planning.” 
This type of mistake appears again and again in debates about artificial intelligence, with 
many experts making pseudoscientific claims about key skills that AI lacks. But instead of 
trying to respond to each of these particular claims, let’s explore the general reason these 
arguments fail.
The general issue with missing components
“Missing component” arguments are brittle because they can’t be scientifically 
substantiated. 
 The Compendium | 30 

Intelligence
To make a compelling argument about a missing component of intelligence, one would 
need to both prove through an empirically supported theory of intelligence that the 
component is indeed a necessary element of intelligence, and then show that it is 
impossible to automate.
Neither of these is possible today because humanity’s scientific understanding of 
intelligence is so limited and piecemeal that we have no agreed upon theory. 
Traditional psychological theories of intelligence fall into one of two camps: they are either 
partially mechanistic but wholly unsupported empirically, or empirically grounded but not 
theoretical and conceptual enough to point to a missing component. The Theory of 
Multiple Intelligences is an example of the former: it proposes different forms of 
intelligence that could count as potential missing components, but lacks empirical 
confirmation. The Parieto-frontal integration theory is an example of the latter: it is 
considered the best empirical claim we have on the locus of intelligence in the brain, but it 
lacks any explanation of cognitive processes that could help identify a missing 
component. Even recent computational models of intelligence, such as active inference 
and computational learning theory, are not sufficiently developed to identify the necessary 
conditions for intelligence. 
AI complicates this further. Even if we knew all the necessary components of intelligence, 
we lack the understanding of modern AI necessary to predict if AI could automate those 
components.
Simply put, we do not yet have any scientific theories of intelligence to make a “missing 
components” argument, nor evidence that AI fundamentally cannot do something. Where 
this leaves us is that the “missing components” argument is nothing more than a vibe, an 
intuition against the possibility of automation that grasps to use any example of modern AI 
struggling. 
But this is a vibe that contradicts all the historical evidence we have about AI. The AI 
Effect shows us that we are constantly breaking walls that we thought were impossible for 
AI to solve, at unexpected times. Moreover, AI capabilities already increase rapidly without 
us understanding them, , with new models constantly revealing previously unexpected 
capabilities. 
We’re a frog in boiling water. A mechanistic view of intelligence-as-intellectual-tasks 
demonstrates that we are getting closer to AGI by the day, as we automate more and more 
intellectual tasks. Arguments of a “missing component” seek to undermine this view, 
holding “real intelligence” as some never-quite reachable standard. The fact these 
 The Compendium | 31 

Intelligence
arguments are scientifically unsubstantiated is a big deal, because it means that we have 
no scientific evidence to disbelieve the trend towards AGI. 
 Thus, AGI.
If intelligence is a matter of solving modular tasks through the sophisticated usage of tools, 
specialization, and refining methods, and there is no viable theory of a missing component, 
we are led to adopt a physicalist interpretation of intelligence. In other words, intelligence 
is built on matter and mechanistic, there is no spiritual barrier to building AGI, and the path 
to AGI is to build systems that can perform each intellectual task that a human can perform. 
Every advancement in AI is chipping away at the number of tasks humans can perform that 
AI cannot perform. Building intelligence component by component, AGI is an engineering 
problem like any other which we are closer to solving by the day. Because we have already 
built systems close to human-level performance, it is simply a matter of time before we 
build an AGI that is able to perform all of the tasks that a human can perform. At this point, 
adding tools and cloning the AGI to billions of copies could create an intelligence that 
quickly rivals that of humanity. 
We therefore find ourselves in a precarious position:
●​ AI capabilities are rapidly increasing and will continue to, regardless of our 
understanding of the nature of  intelligence.
●​ Major AI companies are racing to build AGI, chipping away at the tasks that comprise 
intelligence.
●​ Once built, AGI can quickly exceed the intelligence of a single human. 
●​ And yet, modern AI is unpredictable and uninterpretable, and we lack any theory of 
intelligence that allows us to make confident claims about when AGI will be built or 
what it will be capable of doing.
We believe that the burden of proof is on anyone who believes that we will not be able to 
create AGI. Given the evidence of AI’s progress, the effort directed at building AGI, and the 
risks that come from building such world-changing technology, it is extremely meaningful 
to substantiate arguments for why we shouldn’t be worried about building powerful 
technology, or the related risks. But we do not have credible evidence of a “missing 
component” that will prevent it, and related arguments appear unscientific. 
Given this situation, we argue for a cautious approach: one that looks at the trendlines of 
massively increasing progress and prepares to deal with the advent of AGI seriously.
 The Compendium | 32 

AI Catastrophe
 (3) AI Catastrophe.
 Current AI research leads to extinction by godlike AI.
A mechanistic understanding of intelligence implies that creating AGI depends not on 
equipping it with some ineffable missing component of intelligence, but simply on 
enabling it to perform the intellectual tasks that humans can. 
Once an AI can do that, the research path that AI companies and researchers are currently 
pursuing leads to godlike AI — systems that are so beyond the reach of humanity that they 
are better described as gods and pose the risk of human extinction.
More granularly, we expect AI development to progress as follows:
●​ Current AI research will lead to AGI, intelligence that operates at the human level but 
benefits from the advantages of hardware.
●​ AGI will lead to artificial superintelligence (ASI), intelligence that exceeds humanity’s 
current capabilities. 
●​ ASI will lead to godlike AI, intelligence that is so powerful that it outclasses humanity 
in ways impossible to compete with. 
●​ Godlike AI will lead to extinction.
To avoid catastrophe requires first being clear on the risks, which depends crucially on 
understanding the feasibility of creating godlike AI and its potential capabilities and 
dangers, as well as why the current research path will lead to it.
 Without intervention, current AI research leads to AGI.
We define AGI as an AI system that can perform any intellectual task that a human can do on 
a computer. 
Current AI research leads to AGI because any such intellectual task can be automated. 
Multimodal LLMs can already manage concrete physical tasks such as typing, moving a 
cursor, and making sense of what is displayed. More complex tasks such as navigating the 
web, like Anthropic’s latest Claude model can, are in fact only a series of smaller intellectual 
tasks arranged to achieve some goal. Once an AI can fully interface with a computer and 
perform the intellectual processes humans can, it is AGI.
Building AGI is not a matter of “if,” but “when”; we merely need to determine how to 
automate the intellectual tasks that humans currently perform, which we showed in the 
 The Compendium | 33 

AI Catastrophe
previous section to be a mechanistic process. AGI will be powerful, but its constituent 
parts will be mundane:
●​ Some procedural tasks such as spell-checking, calculating a budget, and mapping 
a path between two locations, are simple to program, and already feasible using 
traditional software.
●​ More complex and informally specified tasks, like image recognition, creative 
writing, and game play, require intuitive judgment. We have failed to formalize these 
intuitions with traditional software, but they are already addressed by deep 
learning. 
●​ Tasks such as driving, designing a plane, and running a company remain out of reach 
for today’s AI, but they are decomposable into subtasks that are either already 
solved or on track for automation.
Without a doubt, current research is actively striving to achieve AGI. OpenAI CEO Sam 
Alman wrote in a recent blog post that
“AGI has the potential to give everyone incredible new capabilities; we can imagine a world 
where all of us have access to help with almost any cognitive task, providing a great force 
multiplier for human ingenuity and creativity.”
Similarly, Anthropic’s “Core Views on AI Safety” states that
“most or all knowledge work may be automatable in the not-too-distant future – this will 
have profound implications for society, and will also likely change the rate of progress of 
other technologies as well.”
It is misleading to suggest that AGI will empower humans – automating the most complex 
intellectual tasks (such as designing a plane or running a company) requires increasingly 
autonomous AIs that are capable of dealing with a wide range of problems, adapting in real 
time, and finding and evaluating alternatives to complex intermediary questions. As this 
unfolds, AIs systems will look less like chatbots and more like independent agents solving 
complex problems by themselves.
Recent releases already confirm this trend, with AI agents running autonomously for longer 
without human feedback. For example, OpenAI’s o1 model is designed to “spend more 
time thinking through problems before they respond, much like a person would.” Systems 
can also more easily self-replicate, as evidenced by Anthropic’s Claude calling other 
instances of itself, described as the ability to “orchestrate multiple fast Claude subagents 
for granular tasks”. As this path continues, AI research will eventually reach AGI.
Already, AGI could very well spell catastrophe for humanity. In the current climate, 
companies such as Meta and Mistral AI would soon release open-weight versions of AGI, 
 The Compendium | 34 

AI Catastrophe
and open-source projects such as llama.cpp would soon make them available on basic 
computers that anyone can get. This means that every single criminal in the world would 
have access to a system that can think better than a human on almost all topics, and help 
them plan and execute their crimes without getting caught. Although law-enforcement 
and governments would also have access to this technology, the situation is heavily 
asymmetric: it takes only one successful malevolent actor to create a massive problem. 
This would force governments and law-enforcements race as fast as possible to get more 
powerful AIs and defer to it, pushing us further on the path of more autonomous and 
powerful AIs.
 Without intervention, AGI leads to artificial superintelligence 
(ASI).
AGI will lead to ASI because it is capable of self-improvement.
AI is software that is programmed by humans using computers. Because AGI can perform 
any intellectual task, it follows that AGI can perform the same research and programming 
that humans can in order to extend the capabilities of AI, and in turn apply its findings to 
itself.
For example, AIs can improve themselves by:
●​ Generating better instructions for themselves
●​ Creating data to train themselves
●​ Building memories of previously successful actions and learning from them
●​ Simulating many scenarios to learn by example without any human input
Current AIs already perform these basic examples of self-improvement, and researchers 
explicitly aim for strongermethods, from training current AIs to program, to generating data 
to build more powerful AIs, to iterative alignment.
AGI could go further, and perform all of the tasks that human researchers do to improve AI, 
like:  
●​ Perform AI research, create, run, and evaluate experiments, and autonomously 
study AI without human supervision.
●​ Optimize AI, making code more performant, building more powerful hardware, and 
finding more efficient algorithms. 
 The Compendium | 35 

AI Catastrophe
●​ Actively “online learn”, running as many instances of itself as possible to learn from 
interacting with the real world through APIs, GUIs, chat platforms, ads data, and so 
on.10
●​ Interact with the real world, such as via video data, emailing or chatting with people, 
using currencies and paying people to do things, robotic telepresence, and so on.
These are techniques that have all been used today, but AGI could go further still, 
discovering new techniques for self-improvement and performing tasks that human 
researchers have not.
The current rate of AI improvement attributable to algorithmic progress implies huge room 
for software improvements, which means that just around the time when AI reaches 
human-level at improving AI algorithms, things will speed up significantly, and will only 
move faster after this.
It is a mistake to assume that this automation will continue to produce mere tools for human 
AI researchers to use. Current research is solely focused on enhancing AI and making it 
more autonomous, not on improving human research understanding. This path does not 
lead to human AI researchers performing more and more sophisticated work, but to 
replacing them with autonomous and agentic AI systems which can more efficiently, 
effectively, and cheaply perform the same tasks.
And as we’ve already seen, this research might even be forced upon governments and 
nations, as the unregulated spread of open-weight AGI would create an actual arms race 
between criminals and governments to develop more and more powerful AIs to handle the 
other’s AIs.
Over time, this self-improvement will lead to artificial superintelligence (ASI), which is 
defined as “intelligence far surpassing that of the brightest and most gifted human minds.” 
We contend that superintelligence will surpass the intelligence of all of humanity, not just its 
star students.
10 Big Tech already uses this strategy to accumulate troves of data for training purposes – an AGI 
could do the same without requiring human oversight.
 The Compendium | 36 

AI Catastrophe
ASI will exceed individual human intelligence 
AGI will be superhuman once it is able to automate anything that a human can do because 
of the intrinsic advantages of digital hardware.
●​ Computers are cheaper and faster to create than humans. Child rearing alone 
takes 18 years and ~$300,000 in middle-class America. Replicating a system is 
decidedly faster, and the most powerful GPUs that host AI models reportedly cost 
approximately $3000.​
●​ Computers are more reliable than humans. Humans are fallible – we can be tired, 
distracted, and unmotivated and require daily nourishment, exercise, and sleep. 
Computers are tireless, perform exact calculations, and require little maintenance.​
 
●​ Computers are much faster at sequential operations than humans. For example, a 
graphics card from 2021 is ~34 TFLOPS, meaning it can perform 34 trillion 10-digit 
multiplications per second. It would take humanity at least five days to perform this 
calculation even under the generous assumption that all 8 billion humans each solve 
~4000 10-digit multiplication problems without interruption or rest. ​
While multiplication is a simple task, this demonstrates that once any task is 
 The Compendium | 37 

AI Catastrophe
automated and optimized, computers will perform it much more efficiently. This 
holds true for reading, which is how humans learn at scale. The first step in reading 
and understanding any text is to simply process the words on the page; at a reading 
speed of 250 words per minute, a human could finish the 47,000-word The Great 
Gatsby in about three hours. An AI from 2023 was able to both read it and respond 
to a question about the story in 22 seconds, about 500 times faster.​
●​ Computers communicate information much faster than humans do. The world's 
fastest talkers can speak 600 words per minute, and the world’s fastest writers can 
type 350 words per minute. In comparison, computers can easily download and 
upload at 1 gigabit per second. Conservatively assuming that an English word is 
eight characters, this converts to a download/upload speed of 900 million words 
per minute — one million times faster than human communication.​
●​ Computers collect and recall information much faster than humans do. 
Memorizing a list of 20 words might take a human ~15 minutes using very efficient 
spaced repetition. A $90 solid-state drive has a read-write speed of 500MB/s. This 
is about 3.5 billion words per minute, literally billions times faster than any human.
An AGI able to automate any human intellectual task would therefore be strictly 
superhuman given performance speed. A conservative estimate posits that near-future AI 
will think 5x faster than humans can, learn 2500x faster, and, if cloned to many copies, 
perform 1.8 million human years of work in two months; some imagine powerful AI looking 
like a “country of geniuses in a datacenter.” 
ASI will exceed humanity’s intelligence
Not only is digital hardware more efficient than a human brain, but digital software also 
offers enables AI to do things humans cannot:
●​ AIs are easy to clone and scale. Language model weights (like Llama3 70B) can 
weigh in the hundreds of GBs; copying a computer program by uploading it to a 
different machine takes just a few minutes. We have no comparable ability in 
humans.​
●​ AIs are easy to modify. Suppose researchers knew how an AI worked, and  
uncovered a mistake in a model. They could fix this simply by rewriting the relevant 
 The Compendium | 38 

AI Catastrophe
part of the source code.11 Humans cannot comparably easily reprogram their 
brains.12
Just as humanity is more powerful than a single human, millions or billions of AI is more 
powerful than a single AI. If AGI reaches human-level intelligence and can clone itself, an 
ever-growing swarm of AIs can quickly rival humanity’s collective intelligence.
Moreover, this swarm can learn faster than the glacial pace at which humanity learns. Plank’s 
principle is that “scientific change does not occur because individual scientists change 
their mind, but rather that successive generations of scientists have different views.” While 
it may take humanity generations to change our minds, AI capable of reprogramming itself 
can fix its intellectual flaws as fast as it notices them.  
Consider that the frontier of human intelligence – our scientific communities – are riddled 
with methodological and coordination failures. As ASI improves, it could transcend these 
failure modes and make rapid scientific progress beyond what humanity has achieved. 
●​ AIs can fix issues in scientific methods much faster than humans. Human fallibility 
impedes progress, as evidenced by the replication crisis in many areas of science, 
which has led to publication bias and HARKing. Potential solutions such as 
preregistration have been proposed, but in practice scientists do not report failures 
and present successes as intentional, making it difficult to evaluate scientific 
literature. These methodological errors may never appear for AI, and if issues arise, 
they could simply be removed with reprogramming. ​
●​ AIs can coordinate much more efficiently than humans can. If multiple AIs are 
collaborating on a problem, it is simple for them to exchange information.​
Human-led research is full of conflict over credit and attribution (such as the order 
of names on a paper, adversarial economic incentives (such as the lack of open 
access forcing universities to pay for papers written by their own researchers), and 
gaming metrics of recognition (such as fixation on the h-index, which reflects not 
the intrinsic quality of someone’s work, but the volume of citations). AI would not 
need vanity metrics, and could evaluate research based simply on what is most 
impactful.  
The field of metascience has emerged to resolve these challenges, but they remain 
unsolved. ASI would not be susceptible to these failures, and it would leverage its 
computational power to comprehensively evaluate large volumes of data and identify 
12 See the issues unearthed by rationalism and behavioral economics.
11 Right now, the reason this can’t be done is that AI researchers have no ideas how the AIs they grow 
work. But AGIs or ASIs would be much better at engineering, science, and ML than humans, to the 
point where they could take advantage of this ease of correcting software.
 The Compendium | 39 

AI Catastrophe
complex high-dimensional patterns. The field is already moving in this direction: DeepMind 
has used AI to automate scientific research in protein folding, chips design, and material 
science. 
To summarize, an AGI capable of performing the same intellectual work that a human can 
would quickly become superintelligent, cloning itself to reach the intelligence level of 
humanity, and reprogramming itself to avoid any errors in its understanding. Compared to 
human intelligence which improves generationally, an AGI can propel itself to the heights of 
intelligence much faster than humanity ever could.
 Without intervention, ASI leads to godlike AI.
There are practical limits to the growth of AI intelligence, but we can expect an intelligence 
that exceeds our own to scale much faster than human intelligence can. And it can easily 
overcome bottlenecks to improvement, be they hardware or software, institutions or 
people, simulations or real life experiments. 
While we don’t know the limits of intelligence, we do understand the limitations of physical 
systems. The estimates below describe the delta between our current outputs and 
theoretical ceilings, from which we can infer the direction of superintelligence’s growth.
●​ Energy will grow. Energy production is bottlenecked by technological progress, 
which is bottlenecked only by our intelligence and effort. Per mass-energy 
equivalence, we know that a ton of matter (including rocks) can theoretically power 
the whole world economy, we just haven’t figured out how to extract this energy. ASI 
could learn to harvest this energy for its own operation, or even harvest the total 
energetic output of the Sun, which is trillions of times the world’s current annual 
power consumption. Although the universe does not offer us infinite energy, we are 
far from reaching its fundamental limits, and should expect any growing intelligence 
to demand more and more energy.​
 
●​ Computers will improve. The physical limits of computations and computational 
complexity theory tell us that hardware and software can still dramatically improve in 
information density and processing speed, which would result in more efficient 
computation. We are in the infancy of software engineering — we only recently 
formally verified small programs, and are nowhere near the limits of proof 
automation architecture. In theory, it’s possible to build software that never fails, at 
scale, on recursively more efficient machines and algorithms. ​
●​ Communication will get faster. We are nearing the theoretical limits of latency (the 
guaranteed speed of information transfer), with optical fiber communications near 
 The Compendium | 40 

AI Catastrophe
the speed of light in a vacuum. However, we are not exercising the full capabilities of 
bandwidth (the volume of data transferred), which offers another dimension for 
quickening communication speed. The Shannon-Hartley theorem and Bekenstein 
bound are two theories that estimate bandwidth limits, but we are far from both. All 
types of bandwidth have continued to increase by orders of magnitude, so we can 
expect communication speed to improve. 
Energy, computation, and communication are rate-limiting factors for the growth of an 
intelligence. Since we are nowhere near the bounds on any of these axes, we can assume 
that ASI can improve along all dimensions and in turn reap compounding benefits. 
Other fields, such as engineering, would also benefit from these optimizations. As ASI 
grows in power, with more energy, better computation, faster communication, and overall 
greater intelligence, ASI will be able to achieve feats far out of reach of what humanity is 
capable of.
●​ Mastery of big things. Many concepts from science fiction are engineering 
problems 
rather 
than 
physical 
impossibilities, 
often 
conceptualized 
by 
scientifically-educated authors. We first produced graphene, the strongest 
material, only 20 years ago, and it is a billion times weaker than the strongest 
theoretical materials. As engineering sciences improve and ASI marshals more 
energy, we should expect megascale and astroscale feats. Ambitious projects such 
as space travel, space elevators, and dyson spheres may be within reach.​
●​ Mastery of small things. At the scale of the nanometer, we are already building 
incredibly precise and complex systems, despite the difficulties posed by many 
quantum effects. Transistors are now measured in nanometers, thousands of times 
smaller than they were decades ago, enabling massive compute progress that has 
driven the recent AI boom. Microbiology shows that complex specialized molecular 
machines, such as ribosomes, are possible, and that more advanced techniques 
beyond CRISPR might make it possible to rebuild life. ASI could master the 
recombination of DNA and atoms, or build micro-scale and milli-scale machinery.​
●​ Mastery of digital things. The digital world is trivial to manipulate and scale —  we 
can easily alter underlying programs and media and clone them. Extrapolating from 
what is already digitized, we can imagine a Matrix-like scenario. When it is 
technologically possible to manipulate perceptual signals directly to the brain, 
actual physical experience becomes more expensive than simulation. At this point, it 
could be possible to simulate reality.
 The Compendium | 41 

AI Catastrophe
ASI that can harness the power of the sun, compute at incomprehensible speeds, build 
atomic machines, and digitize reality is a god compared to humanity. Without intervention, 
artificial intelligence will reach this level of sophistication and power, and then go even 
further.
 Without intervention, godlike AI leads to extinction.
The last few subsections unfolded the expected next steps of our current trajectory, where 
AIs consistently become more autonomous and powerful. More autonomous because 
their makers and users are already delegating more and more of the decisions and planning 
to them. And more powerful because of the relentless push of self-improvement 
catapulting AIs past human – and humanity’s – intelligence, unlocking scientific and 
technological powers at the level of gods.
The end result, if we don’t get wiped out before, is a world where AIs, not humans, are in 
control. Everything, from the economy to supply chains and education, would have been 
delegated to autonomous AIs who can just do anything better than a person, cheaper, 
faster. These AIs wouldn’t be simply tools, because after so many decisions and 
prioritizations delegated to them, they would be running the show.
This spells disaster for humanity because by default we will fail to ensure these godlike-AIs 
do exactly what we want (as argued in the next section), and this misalignment between 
what they aim for and what we want systematically leads to catastrophe for humanity.
For the moment, let’s just assume that we will indeed fail to make godlike-AIs do our 
biddings, and that they will have distinct goals from those of humanity – the next section 
defends this claim in detail. Even with this assumption, why would these godlike-beings 
wipe us out? They might not be controlled by us or do our bidding, but that doesn’t mean 
that they would necessarily hate us or plan our doom, right?
The missing piece here is that so many of the things we need and value are simply in the way 
of whatever godlike-AIs might aim for, and that they would have unlocked the power to just 
impose their might. AIs don’t need plants, they don’t need food, they don’t need oxygen, 
they certainly don’t need human beings to be thriving, healthy, or happy; all of these are 
things at best to be exploited, at worst to be ignored.
If godlike-AIs need more energy, they could simply wrest our electric grid from us, leading 
to total breakdown of our civilization. If they need even more energy, they could capture all 
of the sun’s radiated light13, leaving no sunlight for us and creating devastating 
13 For example through a dyson sphere.
 The Compendium | 42 

AI Catastrophe
consequences for organic life on Earth. If they need more compute (a useful subgoal for a 
software-based intelligence), they could swarm the Earth with datacenters, leveling cities 
in the process; cities which are also great repositories of materials to build such 
datacenters. And so on.
Worse, these examples don’t even mention the many ways in which humans could be a 
slight annoyance, a thorn in the side of godlike-AIs, which would then give them reasons to 
deal with the humans.
When imagining this future, the picture to have in mind is not of some Greek gods who live 
in the clouds and mostly do their own things, sometimes interfering with human affairs; it’s 
of a world owned and shaped by godlike-AIs, where we are ants scuttling on the ground. 
Contractors working on a house don’t hate ants, yet their very work kills a tremendous 
amount of ants, wrecks their infrastructure, and destroys what they (literally) live for. And 
when we find ants in our kitchen or our bathrooms, we almost instantly turn to poison or 
pest control to handle the slight annoyance.
Unaligned godlike-AIs won’t destroy us out of guile, but out of indifference. We would just 
be in the way of any ambitious goal that they might have, and if they’re not aligned with us, 
they simply won’t have any reason to care. And if we fight back… well, did ants ever succeed 
at bringing down humans?
The obvious next question is: why would godlike-AI not be under our control, not follow our 
goals, not care about humanity? Why would we get that wrong in making them? Already, the 
fact that we grow our AIs instead of building them hints at the answer. But let’s fully address 
it in the next section, arguing that this problem – dubbed alignment – is by far the hardest 
question that humanity has ever encountered, that we’re not remotely close to solving it, 
and worse, that as a civilization we’re not even trying to solve it.
 The Compendium | 43 

AI Safety
 (4) AI Safety.
 We are not on track to solve the hard problems of safety.
Some time before we build AI that surpasses humanity’s intelligence, we need to figure out 
how to make AI systems safe. Once AI exceeds humanity’s intelligence, it will be in control, 
and our safety will depend on aligning AI’s goals with humanity’s best interests.
The alignment problem is not a mere technical challenge — it demands that we collectively 
solve one of the most difficult problems that humanity has ever tackled, requiring progress 
in fields that resist formalization, Nobel-prize-level breakthroughs, and billions or trillions of 
dollars of investment.
In Defining alignment, we explain what alignment really means and why it’s not just a 
technical problem but an all-encompassing civilizational one.
In Estimating the cost of solving alignment, we explore what makes alignment challenging, 
and describe what it would cost in terms of effort to solve it and avert extinction. 
In Current technical efforts are not on track to solve alignment, we take a critical look at the 
current level of funding, organizations, and research dedicated to alignment. We argue that 
these efforts are insufficient, and that many of them do not even acknowledge the cost or 
complexity of the challenge. 
In AI will not solve alignment for us, we turn to the question of whether AI can help us solve 
alignment. We show that any potential benefits are mostly illusions, and argue that trying to 
use more advanced AI to solve alignment is a dangerous strategy.
Because both current and future safety efforts are not on track to solve alignment, we 
conclude that we are not on track to avert catastrophe from godlike AI. 
 Defining alignment.
In the field of AI, alignment refers to the ability to “steer AI systems toward a person's or 
group's intended goals, preferences, and ethical principles.”
 The Compendium | 44 

AI Safety
With simpler systems that are less intelligent than humans, the alignment challenge 
addresses simpler safety issues, such as making current chatbots refuse to create 
propaganda or provide instructions for building weapons. 
For systems that exceed human intelligence, the alignment problem is more complex and 
depends on guaranteeing that AI systems as powerful as godlike do what is best for 
humanity. This has a vastly larger scope than just censoring chatbots. 
We already need to solve alignment today, which demands getting individuals, companies, 
and governments to act reliably according to some set of values. Alignment challenges 
vary depending on the scope and entity:
●​ To align individuals, we educate them to behave according to a certain set of cultural 
values. We also enforce compliance with the law through threat of state 
punishment. Most people are aligned and share values, with rare aberrations such as 
sociopathic geniuses or domestic terrorists. 
●​ To align companies with societal values, we rely on regulations, corporate 
governance, and market incentives. However, companies often find loopholes or 
engage in unethical practices, such as how Boeing’s profit motive undermined 
safety, leading to crashes and hundreds of fatalities. 
●​ To align governments with the will of the people, we rely on constitutions, checks 
and balances, and democratic elections. Some countries operate under 
dictatorships or authoritarian regimes. But both of these models can go wrong, 
leading governments to commit atrocities against their own people or experience 
democratic backsliding.
●​ To align humanity toward common goals like peace and environmental 
sustainability, we establish international organizations and agreements, like the 
United Nations and the Paris Climate Accords. On a global scale, enforcement is 
challenging — there are ongoing wars on multiple continents, and we have met only 
17% of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) that all United Nations member 
states have agreed to.
The examples show that alignment relies on processes that reliably incentivize entities to 
pursue good outcomes, based on some set of values. In each of the instances above, we 
need to design processes to determine values (e.g. constitutional conventions), reconcile 
them (e.g. voting), enshrine them (e.g. constitutions, amendments, laws), oversee and 
 The Compendium | 45 

AI Safety
enforce them (e.g. institutions and police), and coordinate the constituent parts (e.g. 
administrations). 
A system is aligned if there is a mechanistic connection between the original values and 
reliable outcomes. For example, while UN member states all share the value of protecting 
the environment and strive toward the Sustainable Development Goals, they lack reliable 
processes to ensure traction. Regardless of intention, without concrete processes we 
cannot consider the UN successfully aligned with protecting the environment. 
While they often fail us, we currently entrust the fate of the world to governments, 
corporations, and international institutions. 
AI alignment demands solving all of the same problems our current institutions try to 
solve, but instead use software to do it. 
As AI becomes more intelligent, its causal impact will increase, and misalignment will be 
more consequential. We must find a way to install our deepest values in AI, addressing 
questions ranging from how to raise children, to what kinds of governance to apply to 
which problems.
Solving the alignment problem is philosophy on a deadline, and requires defining and 
reconciling our values, enshrining them in robust processes, and entrusting those 
processes to AIs that may soon be more powerful than we are.
 Estimating the cost of solving alignment.
Although alignment is not an impossible problem, it is extremely difficult and requires 
answering novel social and technical questions humanity has not yet solved. By 
considering some of these questions, we can understand how much it would cost to solve 
this problem. 
What do we value and how do we reconcile contradictions in values? We must align 
godlike AI with “what humanity wants,” but what does this even mean?
It is clear that even as individuals, we often don’t know what we want. For example, if we say 
and think that we want to spend more time with our family, but then end up playing games 
on our phones, which one do we really want? Individuals often have multiple conflicting 
desires or unconscious preferences that make it difficult to know what someone really 
wants. 
 The Compendium | 46 

AI Safety
When we zoom out from the individual to groups, up to the whole of humanity, the 
complexity of “finding what we want” explodes: when different cultures, different religions, 
different countries disagree about what they want on key questions like state 
interventionism, immigration, or what is moral, how can we resolve these into a fixed set of 
values? If there is a scientific answer to this problem, we have made little progress on it.
If we cannot find, build, and reconcile values that fit with what we want, we will lose control 
of the future to AI systems that ardently defend a shadow of what we actually care about.
Making progress on understanding and reconciling values requires ground-breaking 
advances in the fields of psychology, neuroscience, anthropology, political science, and 
moral philosophy. The former fields are necessary for diving into the human psyche 
resolving uncertainties related to human rationality, emotion, and biases, and the latter two 
are necessary for finding ways to resolve conflicts between these.
How can we predict the consequences of our actions? A positive understanding of “what 
we want” is insufficient to keep AI safe: we also need to understand the consequences of 
getting what we want, to avoid unwanted side effects. 
Yet history demonstrates how often we fail to see consequences of our actions until after 
they are implemented. The Indian vulture crisis was a massive environmental disaster in 
which a new medicine given to cows turned out to be toxic for vultures, which died by 
millions upon eating the carcasses. The collapse in vulture population meant that carcasses 
were not cleaned, contaminating water sources, providing breeding grounds for feral dogs 
with rabies, and ultimately leading to a humanitarian disaster costing billions due to a single 
unknown externality. ​
The same can happen for designing institutions. The Articles of Confederation was the first 
attempt to create a US government, but they left Congress completely impotent to govern 
the individual states, so this had to be corrected in the US constitution. 
Progress on our ability to predict the consequences of our actions requires better science 
in every technical field, and learning what to do with these predictions requires progress in 
fields like non-idealized decision making. The last 100 years have seen some progress in 
scientific thinking and decision theory, and some efforts in rationalism have even 
attempted to inspire better decision-making in light of the AI problem. But while better 
decision-making has had clear consequences in fields like investment – quantitative 
strategies are increasingly outperforming discretionary ones – most people make 
decisions the same way we did 100 years ago. 
 The Compendium | 47 

AI Safety
To confidently move forward on these questions, we need faster science, simulation, and 
modeling; breakthroughs in fields related to decision-making; and better institutions that 
demonstrate these approaches work.
Process design for alignment: If we can answer the philosophical questions of values 
alignment, and get better at predicting and avoiding consequential errors, we still need to 
build processes to ensure that our values are represented in systems and actually enacted 
in the real world. 
Often, even the most powerful entities fail to build processes that connect the dots 
between values and end outcomes. Nearly every country struggles with taxation, 
particularly of large entities and high net worth individuals. And process failures abound in 
history, such as the largest famine ever, which was caused by inefficient distribution of 
food within China’s planned economy during the Great Leap Forward. 
The mechanism design of these entities and their implementation are two separate things. 
When we zoom in on the theory, our best approaches aren’t great. The field of political 
philosophy attempts to make progress on statecraft, but ideas like the separation of 
powers in many modern constitutions are based on 250-year-old theories from 
Montesquieu. New ideas in voting theory have been proposed, and efforts like blockchain 
governance try to implement some of these, but these have done little so far to displace 
our current systems. Slow theoretical progress and little implementation of new systems 
suggest massive room to improve our current statecraft and decision-making processes. 
On the corporate level, we have the theory of the firm and management theory to tell us 
about how to run companies, but the state of the art in designing a winning company today 
looks a lot closer to Y-combinator’s oral theory of knowledge and knowing the right people 
than a science. And even then, the failure rate is very high. 
Neither statecraft nor making a company is a scientific process in which there are formal 
guarantees, and things often go very wrong. In the context of the alignment problem, this 
demonstrates large gaps in humanity’s knowledge that expose huge risks if we were to 
imagine trusting advanced AI systems to run the future. Without better theories and 
implementation, these systems could make the same mistakes, with larger consequences 
given their greater intelligence and power.
Guaranteeing alignment: Last but not least, even if we can design processes to align AIs 
and we know what to align them to, we still need to be able to guarantee and check that 
they will actually do what we want. That is, as in any critical technology, we want guarantees 
that it won’t create a catastrophe before turning it on.
 The Compendium | 48 

AI Safety
This is already difficult with normal software: making (almost) bug-free systems require the 
use of formal methods which are both expensive (in time, skill, effort) and in their infancy, 
especially with regard to the kind of complex properties that we would care about for AIs 
acting in the world.
And this is even harder with AIs built with the current paradigm, due to the fact that they are 
not built by hand (like normal software), but instead grown through mathematical 
optimization. This means that even the makers of AI systems have next to no understanding 
of what they can and cannot do, and no predictive capabilities whatsoever to anticipate 
what they will do before training them, or even just before using them.
But the situation is actually worse than that: whereas most current AI systems are still less 
smart than humans, alignment actually requires getting guarantees on systems that are 
significantly smarter than humans. That is, in addition to managing the complexity of 
software, and the obscurity of neural networks, we need to figure out how to check an 
entity which can outsmart us at every turn.
–
Even if all of these questions need not be answered at once, we nonetheless need to invent 
a process by which they are answered. Currently, our human science and morality is 
inadequate to address the risks posed by advanced AI, and it must improve for us to have a 
chance.
How much would this cost, in terms of funding and human effort?
When we look at major research efforts that humans have pursued in the past which led to 
breakthroughs and Nobel prizes, we can begin to envision what such a “significant research 
project” constitutes. The Manhattan Project cost $27B to produce the first nuclear 
weapons, and at its height employed 130,000 people. Over four years, researchers and 
engineers cracked problem after problem to develop the bomb, with over 31 Nobel-prize 
winners tied to the project. Another massive research effort, the Human Genome Project 
(HGP), cost $5B over 13 years and required contributions from thousands of researchers 
from various countries.
If alignment was of the same difficulty level as these problems, we would assume at least a 
tens-of-billions of dollars effort, featuring thousands of people, with dedicated 
coordination, and multiple breakthroughs of Nobel-prize magnitude. 
 The Compendium | 49 

AI Safety
But the cost of alignment is almost guaranteed to be significantly higher. While the HGP 
and Manhattan Project were profoundly difficult projects, they were concentrated in 
narrower domains of study in fields that were already hard sciences. In contrast, alignment 
is a pre-paradigmatic field, in which many of the questions we need to answer resist study. 
Many of the domains above that require advances (psychology, anthropology, economics, 
simulation) are not hard sciences, but would need to become them – similar to the 
transitions from alchemy to chemistry. And at the end of the day, alignment needs to be 
just right, as “close but dangerously wrong”14 answers could lead to death. 
Given the magnitude of the danger ahead, the complexity and uncertainty of these 
estimates should make us even more careful, and cause us to assume that the costs may 
be higher still than what is presented here.
We conclude that solving alignment is extremely hard, and the cost is clearly very high: at 
least billions, maybe trillions, with a time frame of decades, and with research of a  
Nobel-prize-winning quality.
 Current technical efforts are not on track to solve alignment.
The field of AI Safety is not making meaningful progress on or investment in alignment; 
current funding and focus are insufficient, and the research approaches being pursued do 
not attend to the hard problems of aligning AI. 
On the capabilities side, there are reports that OpenAI and Microsoft plan to build a $100B 
data center, and Demis Hassabis has commented that Google DeepMind is “investing 
more than that over time.” 
In comparison, government AI Safety Institutes are funded on the order of tens to hundreds 
of millions, with the UK’s AISI allocated £100m, and alignment funding outside AGI 
companies and government estimated at $100m/year. At AGI companies such as 
DeepMind, alignment research efforts are run by small teams, and some (like OpenAI) are 
presently suffering from mass exodus. The most concerted alignment-related investment 
focuses on compute-intensive interpretability experiments and on the teams that run 
them, but this is unlikely to reach beyond the tens of millions.
14 Specification gaming is the idea that an AI can satisfy the goal that a developer sets out for it 
during training, but end up following a different goal later. This occurs for a few reasons, but the 
result is dangerous in every case involving superintelligence: with systems this powerful, slight 
divergences from the original goal could lead to catastrophic divergences in downstream actions.
 The Compendium | 50 

AI Safety
And these are optimistic estimates; in reality, only a tiny fraction of this total goes to 
genuine AI alignment efforts. With few exceptions, the majority of funding is directed at 
problems associated with AI safety, rather than paying the exorbitant cost of alignment. 
Nearly all current technical safety approaches are limited in their efficacy and trail their own 
stated goals:​
●​ Black-box evaluations and red-teaming aim to test a model's capabilities to 
evaluate how powerful or dangerous it is. With this strategy, the theory of change is 
that identifying dangerous behavior could force AI companies to pause 
development or governments to coordinate on regulation. Teams working on 
evaluations include AI Safety Institutes, METR and Evaluations at Anthropic.​
Black-Box Evaluations can only catch all relevant safety issues insofar as we have 
either an exhaustive list of all possible failure modes, or a mechanistic model of how 
concrete capabilities lead to safety risks. We currently have neither, so evaluations 
boil down to ad-hoc lists of tests that capture some possible risks. These are 
insufficient even for today’s models, as demonstrated by the fact that current LLMs 
can notice they are being tested, which the evaluators and researchers did not even 
anticipate.​
●​ Interpretability aims to reverse-engineer the concepts and thought processes a 
model uses to understand what it can do and how it works. This approach presumes 
that a more complete understanding of the systems could prevent misbehavior, or 
unlock new ways to control models, such as training them to be fully honest. Teams 
working on interpretability include Interpretability at Anthropic and Apollo Research.​
Interpretability’s value depends on its ability to fully understand and reverse 
engineer AI systems to check if they have capabilities and thoughts that might lead 
to unsafe actions. Yet current interpretability research is unable to do that even for 
LLMs a few generations back (GPT2), let alone for the massive and complex models 
used in practice today (Claude and GPT4/o1). ​
And even with full understanding and reverse engineering of state of the art LLMs, 
interpretability is blind to any form of extended cognition, such as what the system 
can do when connected to the environment (notably the internet), given tools, 
interacting with other systems or instances of itself. A huge part of recent progress 
in AI comes from moving to agents and scaffolding that leverage exactly this form of 
extended cognition. Just as solving neuroscience would be insufficient to explain 
how a company works, even full interpretability of an LLM would be insufficient to 
 The Compendium | 51 

AI Safety
explain most research efforts on the AI frontier.​
●​ Whack-A-Mole Fixes use techniques like RLHF, fine-tuning, and prompting to 
remove undesirable model behavior or a specific failure mode. The theory of 
change is that current safety problems can be solved in a patchwork manner, 
addressed as they arise, and that we can perhaps learn from this process to correct 
the behavior of more advanced systems. Teams working on this include Alignment 
Capabilities at Anthropic and OpenAI’s Safety Team.​
Whack-A-Mole fixes, from RLHF to finetuning, are about teaching the system to not 
demonstrate problematic behavior, not about fundamentally fixing that behavior. 
For example, a model that produces violent text output may be finetuned to be 
more innocuous, but the underlying base model is just as capable of producing 
violent content as ever. The problem as to how this behavior arose in the first place is 
left unaddressed by even the best finetuning. By pushing for models to hide unsafe 
actions rather than resolving underlying issues, whack-a-mole fixes lead to models 
that are more and more competent at hiding their issues and failures, rather than 
models that are genuinely safer.
At best, these strategies can identify and incrementally correct problems, address model 
misbehavior, and use misbehavior as a red flag to motivate policy solutions and 
regulations. However, even according to their proponents, these strategies do not attempt 
to align superhuman AI, but merely try to align the next generation of systems, trusting that 
partial alignment of the Nth systems will help align the N+1 system. 
This approach can be thought of as Iterative Alignment, a strategy that rests on the hope 
that we can build slightly smarter systems, align those, and use them to help align 
successor systems, repeating the process until we reach superintelligent AI. OpenAI’s 
Superalignment plan explicitly states this:
Currently, we don't have a solution for steering or controlling a potentially superintelligent AI, 
and preventing it from going rogue. Our current techniques for aligning AI, such as 
reinforcement learning from human feedback, rely on humans’ ability to supervise AI. But 
humans won’t be able to reliably supervise AI systems much smarter than us, and so our 
current alignment techniques will not scale to superintelligence. We need new scientific and 
technical breakthroughs.
Our goal is to build a roughly human-level automated alignment researcher. We can then use 
vast amounts of compute to scale our efforts, and iteratively align superintelligence. To align 
the first automated alignment researcher, we will need to 1) develop a scalable training 
method, 2) validate the resulting model, and 3) stress test our entire alignment pipeline.
 The Compendium | 52 

AI Safety
The plans of nearly every other AI company are similarly limited and failure-prone attempts 
at iterative alignment. Deepmind’s 2024 update on AGI safety approaches discusses the 
evaluative techniques listed above and names “amplified oversight” as its focus. 
Anthropic’s Core Views on AI Safety describes how the evaluative techniques can be 
combined in a “portfolio approach” to keep advanced AI safe, and offers a similar 
justification for iterative alignment:
Turning language models into aligned AI systems will require significant amounts of 
high-quality feedback to steer their behaviors. A major concern is that humans won't be able 
to provide the necessary feedback. It may be that humans won't be able to provide 
accurate/informed enough feedback to adequately train models to avoid harmful behavior 
across a wide range of circumstances. It may be that humans can be fooled by the AI 
system, and won't be able to provide feedback that reflects what they actually want (e.g. 
accidentally providing positive feedback for misleading advice). It may be that the issue is a 
combination, and humans could provide correct feedback with enough effort, but can't do 
so at scale. This is the problem of scalable oversight, and it seems likely to be a central issue 
in training safe, aligned AI systems.
Ultimately, we believe the only way to provide the necessary supervision will be to have AI 
systems partially supervise themselves or assist humans in their own supervision. Somehow, 
we need to magnify a small amount of high-quality human supervision into a large amount of 
high-quality AI supervision. This idea is already showing promise through techniques such as 
RLHF and Constitutional AI, though we see room for much more to make these techniques 
reliable with human-level systems. We think approaches like these are promising because 
language models already learn a lot about human values during pretraining. Learning about 
human values is not unlike learning about other subjects, and we should expect larger 
models to have a more accurate picture of human values and to find them easier to learn 
relative to smaller models. The main goal of scalable oversight is to get models to better 
understand and behave in accordance with human values.
Regardless of whether or not one believes that this strategy will work, it is clear that this 
approach does not adequately address the true complexity of alignment. A meaningful 
attempt at alignment must integrate moral philosophy to understand values reconciliation, 
implement formal verification to make guarantees about system properties, consider 
humanitarian questions of what we value and why, and propose institution design, at 
minimum. All current efforts fail to do so.
Today’s AI safety research is vastly underfunded compared to investments in capabilities 
work, and the majority of technical approaches intentionally do not address the 
conceptual complexity of alignment, instead operating in a reactive  empiricist framework 
that simply identifies misbehavior once it already exists. Humanity’s current AI safety plan is 
to race toward building superintelligent AI, and delegate the most difficult questions of 
alignment to AI itself. This is a naive and dangerous approach.
 The Compendium | 53 

AI Safety
 AI will not solve alignment for us.
For a safe future, we must solve the hard problems of alignment, allocating adequate 
research hours, investment, and coordination effort. OpenAI, Deepmind, Anthropic, X.AI 
(“accelerating human scientific discovery”), and others have all proposed deferring and 
outsourcing these questions to more advanced future AI systems.
But on reflection, this is an incredibly risky approach. Situational Awareness, a document 
written by ex-OpenAI superalignment researcher Leopold Aschenbrenner which has 
gotten significant traction even from popular news outlets, puts the argument bluntly. 
Aschenbrenner argues for a vision of the future in which AI becomes powerful extremely 
quickly due to scaling up the orders of magnitude (“OOMs”) of AI models. When discussing 
future safety approaches, he makes a vivid argument for iterative alignment:​
Ultimately, we’re going to need to automate alignment research. There’s no way we’ll 
manage to solve alignment for true superintelligence directly; covering that vast of an 
intelligence gap seems extremely challenging. Moreover, by the end of the intelligence 
explosion—after 100 million automated AI researchers have furiously powered through a 
decade of ML progress—I expect much more alien systems in terms of architecture and 
algorithms compared to current system (with potentially less benign properties, e.g. on 
legibility of CoT, generalization properties, or the severity of misalignment induced by 
training). 
But we also don’t have to solve this problem just on our own. If we manage to align 
somewhat-superhuman systems enough to trust them, we’ll be in an incredible position: 
we’ll have millions of automated AI researchers, smarter than the best AI researchers, at our 
disposal. Leveraging these army of automated researchers properly to solve alignment for 
even-more superhuman systems will be decisive. 
Getting automated alignment right during the intelligence explosion will be extraordinarily 
high-stakes: we’ll be going through many years of AI advances in mere months, with little 
human-time to make the right decisions, and we’ll start entering territory where alignment 
failures could be catastrophic. ​
The dangers here are explicit: alien systems, huge advances in mere months, and a 
tightrope walk through an “intelligence explosion” in which wrong choices could lead to 
catastrophe. 
But even before we get to a dramatic vision of the AI future, the iterative alignment strategy 
has an ordering error – we first need to achieve alignment to safely and effectively leverage 
AIs. 
 The Compendium | 54 

AI Safety
Consider a situation where AI systems go off and “do research on alignment” for a while, 
simulating tens of years of human research work. The problem then becomes: how do we 
check that the research is indeed correct, and not wrong, misguided, or even deceptive? 
We can’t just assume this is the case, because the only way to fully trust an AI system is if 
we’d already solved alignment, and knew that it was acting in our best interest at the 
deepest level.
Thus we need to have humans validate the research. That is, even automated research runs 
into a bottleneck of human comprehension and supervision.
Proponents of iterated alignment argue that this is not a real issue, because “evaluation is 
easier than generation.” For example, Aschenbrenner further argues in Situational 
Awareness that:
We get some of the way [to superalignment] “for free,” because it’s easier for us to evaluate 
outputs (especially for egregious misbehaviors) than it is to generate them ourselves. For 
example, it takes me months or years of hard work to write a paper, but only a couple hours 
to tell if a paper someone has written is any good (though perhaps longer to catch fraud). 
We’ll have teams of expert humans spend a lot of time evaluating every RLHF example, and 
they’ll be able to “thumbs down” a lot of misbehavior even if the AI system is somewhat 
smarter than them. That said, this will only take us so far (GPT-2 or even GPT-3 couldn’t 
detect nefarious GPT-4 reliably, even though evaluation is easier than generation!)
The argument holds for standard peer-review, where the authors and reviewers are 
generally on the same intellectual level, with sensibly similar cognitive architecture, 
education, and knowledge. But this does not apply to automated alignment research, 
where to be useful the research needs to be done by AIs that are both smarter and faster 
than humans.
The appropriate analogy is not one researcher reviewing another, but rather a group of 
preschoolers reviewing the work of a million Einsteins. It might be easier and faster than 
doing the research itself, but it will still take years and years of effort and verification to 
check any single breakthrough.
Fundamentally, the problem with iterative alignment is that it never pays the cost of 
alignment. Somewhere along the story, alignment gets implicitly solved – yet no one ever 
proposes an actual plan for doing so beyond “the (unaligned) AIs will help us”.
There are other risks with this approach as well. 
The more powerful AI we have, the faster things will go. As AI systems improve and 
 The Compendium | 55 

AI Safety
automate their own learning, AGI will be able to improve faster than our current research, 
and ASI will be able to improve faster than humanity can do science. The dynamics of 
intelligence growth means that it is possible for an ASI “about as smart as humanity” to 
move to “beyond all human scientific frontiers” on the order of weeks or months. While the 
change is most dramatic with more advanced systems, as soon as we have AGI we enter a 
world where things begin to move much quicker, forcing us to solve alignment much faster 
than in a pre-AGI world.
Tensions between world powers will also heat up as AI becomes more powerful, something 
we are already witnessing in AI weapons used in warfare, global disinformation campaigns, 
the US-China chip war, and how Europe is struggling with regulation around Big Tech. As we 
move towards AGI, ASI, and eventually godlike AI, pressure on existing international treaties 
and diplomacy methods will be pushed beyond their limits. Unlike with nuclear war, there is 
not necessarily the same promise of mutually assured destruction with AI that could create 
a (semi)stable equilibrium. Ensuring geopolitical stability is necessary to create supportive 
conditions to solve the hard problems of alignment, something that gets more challenging 
if AI is becoming rapidly more powerful. 
AGI and its successor AIs will also cause massive political, economical, and societal 
destabilization 
through 
automating 
disinformation 
and 
online manipulation, job 
automation, and other shifts that look like “issues seen today but magnified as systems 
grow stronger”. This in turn makes coordination around massive research projects like the 
ones necessary to solve alignment extremely difficult. 
Thus, iterative alignment fails on multiple accounts. In addition to not addressing the hard 
parts of alignment, it also encourages entering a time-pressured and precarious world.
–
We have seen that alignment is an incredibly complex technical and social problem, one of 
the most complex any civilization needs to handle. And while the costs are enormous, no 
one is even starting to pay them, instead hoping that they will disappear by themselves as 
AIs become more powerful.
In light of this failure to address the risks of godlike-AI from a research angle, it’s necessary 
to aggressively slow down and regulate AI progress, in order to avoid the catastrophe 
ahead. This comes from strong AI regulations, policies, and institutions.
Unfortunately, as we explore next, the landscape is as barren here as it is on the research 
side.
 The Compendium | 56 

AI Governance
 (5) AI Governance.
.We lack the mechanisms to control.​
 technology development.
Because we are unlikely to align godlike AI in time, we must find means to control AI 
development and avert the catastrophic default path altogether. This requires preventing 
the creation of AGI or implementing stop-gaps to prevent AGI from scaling to 
superintelligence and beyond. The most straightforward path to controlling AI 
development is through policy and governance; but these efforts are currently not on 
track. 
In Defining AI Governance, we explore what kind of governance is necessary to avoid 
existential risks, notably slowing down and regulating AI research progress, and blocking 
the race to AGI. We highlight A Narrow Path as a comprehensive strategy for preventing the 
creation of superintelligence for 20 years.
In Estimating what is necessary to control AI development, we argue that controlling AI 
development would require effective oversight by governments over private sector or 
rogue actors, and mutual oversight by governments over each other. 
In Current AI policy efforts are not on track to control AI development, we take a critical 
look at the current policy and governance efforts that focus on existential risk from AI, and 
find them lacking. In addition to a relative dearth of impactful efforts, most efforts fail 
because they implicitly endorse the status quo. 
In Current AI policy efforts endorse the race to AGI, we argue that the true reason AI policy 
efforts are not on track to control superintelligence risk is that many of them derive from 
the very actors racing to build AGI. 
 Defining AI governance.
AI governance must implement mechanisms that allow humanity to evaluate the risks and 
potential benefits of AGI and other advanced AIs. Miotti et al’s A Narrow Path offers a 
comprehensive vision, describing three phases of policy development: 
Phase 0: Safety: New institutions, legislation, and policies that countries should implement 
immediately that prevent development of AI that we do not have control of. With correct 
 The Compendium | 57 

AI Governance
execution, the strength of these measures should prevent anyone from developing artificial 
superintelligence for the next 20 years.
Phase 1: Stability: International measures and institutions that ensure measures to control 
the development of AI do not collapse under geopolitical rivalries or rogue development by 
state and non-state actors. With correct execution, these measures should ensure stability 
and lead to an international AI oversight system that does not collapse over time.
Phase 2: Flourishing: With the development of rogue superintelligence prevented and a 
stable international system in place, humanity can focus on the scientific foundations for 
transformative AI under human control. Build a robust science and metrology of intelligence, 
safe-by-design AI engineering, and other foundations for transformative AI under human 
control.
A Narrow Path is not a policy proposal so much as a thesis on how to avoid extinction by 
superintelligence. It is one of the few comprehensive visions of global governance that 
adequately contends with superintelligence risk and acknowledges and considers the 
immense challenges of alignment. As one commenter writes:
The key is you must pick one of these:
1.​
Building a superintelligence under current conditions will turn out fine.
2.​ No one will build a superintelligence under anything like current conditions.
3.​ We must prevent at almost all costs anyone building superintelligence soon...
…If you know you won’t be able to bite either of those first two bullets? Then it’s time to figure 
out the path to victory, and talk methods and price. And we should do what is necessary now 
to gather more information, and ensure we have the option to walk down such paths.
In other words, superintelligent risk forces us to contend with the worst case scenario, and 
the default path is perilous. We have not come across any comparably robust proposals for 
averting extinction risk, so A Narrow Path’s proposal is the best plan we have today.
 Estimating what is necessary to control AI development.
To prevent the default trajectory where AI progress leads to AGI, ASI, and godlike AI, 
civilization must be able to pause or stop AI progress when it becomes necessary for 
safety. We lack that ability today. 
In order to stop AI development, we would need to rein in:
●​ The large companies racing to build AGI.
●​  Nation states such as the US, China, and others with AGI capacity.
 The Compendium | 58 

AI Governance
●​ Academic research.
●​ Open-weight releases and research.
Because the barrier to entry is low enough that new private actors keep entering the race to 
AGI, this list will grow.
Any regulation needs to be coordinated to prevent defection by a rogue actor. At the very 
least, we would need:
●​ National regulations in the US and other world powers to govern leading AI 
companies and academic research.
●​ International regulations on open-weight publishing, contribution, and ownership to 
prevent bad actors from building AGI outside of regulated bodies. 
●​ International coordination through treaties, high-bandwidth communication lines, 
and multinational agreements enforced by international law, to deter any nation 
state from racing to superintelligence and endangering everyone.
These regulations require concrete technical systems to detect violations, such as 
catching high-compute training runs, and mechanisms to implement restrictions, such as 
physical kill-switches that could shut down datacenters in which AI runs. We lack these 
regulations and mechanisms today.
It’s important to realize that these regulations are there to prevent the need for much 
stronger ones. Because if companies are allowed to release open-weight AGIs that can run 
on consumer hardware, the only way for governments to avoid catastrophe from AI would 
be policing what happens on every single computer in the world to catch all dangerous 
uses. A world with open-weight AGI is at best a world where personal freedoms are 
sacrificed for the survival of humanity. 
To avoid this fate, political will is insufficient; it is not enough just for people to want AI to be 
safe, or want to control AI. At minimum, we need institutions, policy frameworks, technical 
levers, communication lines, and people who understand the risks of superintelligence in 
positions of authority. 
Just as alignment depends on connecting our values to good future outcomes, AI 
governance is about building a process15 that connects humanity’s will to the AI 
15 A future draft owes a better description of a "process." But what we mean is roughly a reliable 
sequence of physical steps (e.g. sending a message, stamping a document for formal approval) 
with an input and output. Thinking about the world in this mechanistic way is foundational to our 
thesis – if we can't draw a physical trace from the first step to the last step, we argue that no such 
process exists.
 The Compendium | 59 

AI Governance
technological frontier. Without a process to slow or stop the development of AI even if 
humanity wanted to, then it is straightforwardly the case that humanity is not in control of AI. 
 Current AI policy efforts are not on track to control AI 
development.
The last few years have seen increased AI policy and governance efforts, but few focus on 
superintelligence risks. Those that do are insufficient, and sometimes actively harmful by 
implicitly endorsing the current race to AGI. 
Today’s best attempt at an international reckoning with the risks of superintelligence is the 
Bletchley Declaration, a statement from the first International AI Safety Summit, which 
acknowledges “catastrophic” risks and promises future international cooperation16:
There is potential for serious, even catastrophic, harm, either deliberate or unintentional, 
stemming from the most significant capabilities of [frontier] AI models. Given the rapid and 
uncertain rate of change of AI, and in the context of the acceleration of investment in 
technology, we affirm that deepening our understanding of these potential risks and of 
actions to address them is especially urgent.
Many risks arising from AI are inherently international in nature, and so are best addressed 
through international cooperation. We resolve to work together in an inclusive manner to 
ensure human-centric, trustworthy and responsible AI that is safe, and supports the good of 
all through existing international fora and other relevant initiatives, to promote cooperation 
to address the broad range of risks posed by AI.
Following the United Kingdom’s example, governments around the world are creating 
national AI Safety Institutes. While their resourcing and missions vary widely, they are 
broadly tasked with helping governments build capacity to make more informed decisions 
on how to manage the development and deployment of advanced AI systems. 
On the regulatory side, some countries have started legislating AI development. The EU has 
passed its AI Act. China has drafted Interim Measures to oversee generative AI. The UK will 
consider AI regulation in an upcoming bill. The US has issued an executive order on AI 
oversight, though California’s governor recently vetoed the first meaningful legislation for 
controlling advanced AI risks, SB 1047. These proposals similarly emphasize the possible 
need for future controls, but do little if anything to restrict frontier AI development today. 
16 A message from the second summit in Seoul goes further, with AGI companies agreeing to 
recognise that there are some "intolerable" risks from AI after which point AI development should 
stop. 
 The Compendium | 60 

AI Governance
Internationally, the UN established an AI-focused advisory body and the OECD and 
UNESCO have formed AI working groups. The US and some of its allies are attempting to 
limit China’s AI development by restricting the export of the required computational 
resources while academic researchers are pursuing more collaborative Track 2 dialogues 
to build common ground on AI governance. 
Meanwhile, AGI companies are claiming to adopt self-regulatory measures, such as 
Anthropic’s Responsible Scaling Policies, OpenAI’s Preparedness Framework, and 
DeepMind’s Frontier Safety Framework.
All of these efforts are ineffective:
●​ We lack effective intervention mechanisms. The hardware to enforce pauses in AI 
development is currently just a prototype maintained by one small team. Policies 
that establish mandatory thresholds for AI development (e.g. preventing AI 
self-replication or placing limitations on general capabilities) do not exist. SB 1047 
was vetoed due to significant lobbying by Big Tech and VCs, despite the fact that it 
was popular enough to pass the California legislature, receive 77% voter support, 
and garner endorsement from Nobel Prize-winning AI researchers and hundreds of 
AI company employees.​
●​ Relevant technical actors are not overseen. We lack national regulators that have 
authority over the specific challenges posed by AI. In the US, the White House’s 
voluntary commitments have failed to introduce meaningful transparency or 
accountability. Globally, AI Safety Institutes lack formal power over AI developers 
and must rely on voluntary cooperation, which is often limited and tenuous. Of the 16 
AI companies that signed the Frontier AI Safety Commitments after the latest AI 
Summit in Seoul, most have failed to provide transparency around their safety plans; 
X.ai has not published a safety strategy. As it stands, national oversight endorses the 
voluntary evaluations framework proposed by AGI companies, concentrating 
power in the very actors driving the risks. 
●​ Open-weight development is unregulated. Open-weight AGI development is 
thriving: hundreds of AI papers are published daily, and open-source repositories 
regularly push capabilities in agent frameworks beyond the state of the art. 
Whenever new levels of capabilities are unlocked by AI companies, open-weight 
models are released soon after and optimized to be used by anyone without any 
check or supervision. This means giving powerful and dangerous tools, for free, to 
anyone with a computer. And when the inevitable happens, such as the creation and 
distribution of child sexual abuse pornography,  one of the most heinous uses of 
 The Compendium | 61 

AI Governance
open-weight AIs17, only the end user is  condemned in the rare cases where anyone 
is sanctioned, leaving off the hook both model creators and the websites hosting 
them. This is an unsustainable situation, a boiling kettle ready to explode with the 
release of open-weight AGI.
●​ International groups on AI lack power. In the past, international governance bodies 
for nuclear, biochemical, and human cloning research have been relatively effective, 
offering lessons we can apply to AI regulation. We do not have equivalent AI 
institutions today, and the current international groups are mere advisory bodies.​
●​ There is no plan for a safe AI future. A meaningful plan to address AI risk must 
contain provisions capable of preventing the creation of superintelligence and 
managing its threats. No such proposals exist, and there are no international bodies 
or appointed individuals responsible for drafting or enforcing one. A Narrow Path is 
an exception, but its recency and necessity points at the inadequacy of official 
governance efforts. 
Even advocates of current coordination efforts agree that they are insufficient; AI Safety 
Institutes are well aware of their tenuous relationship with AGI companies.
The majority of existing AI safety efforts are reactive rather than proactive, which 
inherently puts humanity in the position of managing risk rather than preventing it.
This reactive approach has both technical and policy components. 
●​ The technical strategy includes the AI safety efforts discussed in Section 4: 
black-box evaluations and red-teaming, interpretability, whack-a-mole fixes, and 
iterative alignment. Each of these solutions assume that we can catch problems 
with AI as they arise, and then alert policymakers of the risks.
●​ The policy strategy assumes that we can then use these risks to build consensus for 
new legislation, or trigger regulatory actions such as shutting down AI development. 
Holden Karnofsky, ex-co-CEO and ex-director of AI Strategy at Open Philanthropic (an 
organization which has funded multiple AI governance efforts) calls this the “if-then” 
framework:
 
If-then commitments… are commitments of the form: “If an AI model has capability X, risk 
mitigations Y must be in place. And, if needed, we will delay AI deployment and/or 
development to ensure the mitigations can be present in time.” A specific example: “If an AI 
17 A heinous use for which the AIs are trained, since child abuse pictures are part of the training data 
of these image generation AIs.
 The Compendium | 62 

AI Governance
model has the ability to walk a novice through constructing a weapon of mass destruction, 
we must ensure that there are no easy ways for consumers to elicit behavior in this category 
from the AI model.”
If-then commitments can be voluntarily adopted by AI developers; they also, potentially, 
can be enforced by regulators. Adoption of if-then commitments could help reduce risks 
from AI in two key ways: (a) prototyping, battle-testing, and building consensus around a 
potential framework for regulation; and (b) helping AI developers and others build roadmaps 
of what risk mitigations need to be in place by when. Such adoption does not require 
agreement on whether major AI risks are imminent—a polarized topic—only that certain 
situations would require certain risk mitigations if they came to pass.
The UK AI Safety Institute explains evaluations in a similar manner:
A gold standard for development and deployment decisions of frontier AI would include a 
comprehensive set of clearly defined risk and capability thresholds that would likely lead to 
unacceptable outcomes, unless mitigated appropriately. We think governments have a 
significant role to play, as 27 countries and the EU recognised at the AI Seoul Summit 2024. 
We have thus begun work to identify capability thresholds: specific AI capabilities that are 
indicative of potentially severe risks, could be tested for, and should trigger certain actions 
to mitigate risk. They correspond to pathways to harm from our risk modelling, such as 
capabilities that would remove current barriers for malicious actors or unlock new ways of 
causing harm.
Anthropic describes the reactive approach in its Responsible Scaling Policy:
Since the frontier of AI is rapidly evolving, we cannot anticipate what safety and security 
measures will be appropriate for models far beyond the current frontier. We will thus 
regularly measure the capability of our models and adjust our safeguards accordingly. 
Further, we will continue to research potential risks and next-generation mitigation 
techniques. And, at the highest level of generality, we will look for opportunities to improve 
and strengthen our overarching risk management framework.
This approach is flawed:
1.​ The reactive framework reverses the burden of proof from how society typically 
regulates high-risk technologies and industries. ​
In most areas of law, we do not wait for harm to occur before implementing 
safeguards. Banks are prohibited from facilitating money laundering from the 
moment of incorporation, not after their first offense. Nuclear power plants must 
demonstrate safety measures before operation, not after a meltdown.​
 The Compendium | 63 

AI Governance
The reactive framework problematically reverses the burden of proof. It assumes AI 
systems are safe by default and only requires action once risks are detected. One of 
the core dangers of AI systems is precisely that we do not know what they will do or 
how powerful they will be before we train them. The if-then framework opts to 
proceed until problems arise, rather than pausing development and deployment 
until we can guarantee safety. This implicitly endorses the current race to AGI.​
This reversal is exactly what makes the reactive framework preferable for AI 
companies. As METR, the organization that first coined the term “responsible scaling 
policy,” writes: 
RSPs are intended to appeal to both (a) those who think AI could be extremely 
dangerous and seek things like moratoriums on AI development, and (b) those who 
think that it’s too early to worry. Under both of these views, RSPs are a promising 
intervention: by committing to gate scaling on concrete evaluations and empirical 
observations, then (if the evaluations are sufficiently accurate!) we should expect to 
halt AI development in cases where we do see dangerous capabilities, and continue 
it in cases where worries about dangerous capabilities have not yet emerged.​
2.​ The reactive framework overlooks the dynamics of AI development that make 
regulation more difficult over time. ​
AI is being developed extremely quickly and by many actors, and the barrier to entry 
is low and quickly diminishing. The biggest GPT-2 model (1.5B parameters) cost an 
estimated $43,000 to train in 2019; today it is possible to train a 350M parameters 
GPT-2 for $200 in 14 hours. Paul Graham mentions an estimate that the ratio of 
training price by performance decreased 100x in each of the last two years, or 
10000x in two years. Due to low standards of information protection, the “secret 
sauce” of training AI systems is becoming increasingly common knowledge, making 
it easier to create powerful systems. Since the latest models almost always get 
emulated and reproduced in some way in open-weight, there are truly no 
“take-backs” with AI development. Technical releases that advance the state of the 
art have a ratcheting effect that is difficult and sometimes impossible to reverse. 
Because of these dynamics, AI gets harder to regulate over time. As more actors 
become capable of building powerful and dangerous AI, oversight will need to be 
more far-reaching to effectively manage the negative externalities of AI systems. 
Because of the ratcheting effect of powerful AI, safety policies must prevent the 
creation of dangerous systems — once they exist or are released publicly, it is much 
more difficult to prevent their proliferation. ​
 The Compendium | 64 

AI Governance
The reactive framework fails to address either of these problems because it tacitly 
endorses AI proliferation until the cusp when AI is extremely dangerous (and even 
then, assumes it will catch where and when this cusp is). If powerful AI technology 
has widely proliferated by the time a risk is detected, it will be vastly more difficult to 
maintain safety and international stability than if AI is controlled proactively.
3.​ The reactive framework incorrectly assumes that an AI “warning shot” will 
motivate coordination.
Imagine an extreme situation in which an AI disaster serves as a “warning shot” for 
humanity. This would imply that powerful AI has been developed and that we have 
months (or less) to develop safety measures or pause further development. After a 
certain point, an actor with sufficiently advanced AI may be ungovernable, and 
misaligned AI may be uncontrollable. 
When horrible things happen, people do not suddenly become rational. In the face 
of an AI disaster, we should expect chaos, adversariality, and fear to be the norm, 
making coordination very difficult. The useful time to facilitate coordination is 
before disaster strikes. 
However, the reactive framework assumes that this is essentially how we will build 
consensus in order to regulate AI. The optimistic case is that we hit a dangerous 
threshold before a real AI disaster, alerting humanity to the risks. But history shows 
that it is exactly in such moments that these thresholds are most contested  –  this 
shifting of the goalposts is known as the AI Effect and common enough to have its 
own Wikipedia page. Time and again, AI advancements have been explained away 
as routine processes, whereas “real AI” is redefined to be some mystical threshold 
we have not yet reached. Dangerous capabilities are similarly contested as they 
arise, such as how recent reports of OpenAI’s o1 being deceptive have been 
questioned. 
This will become increasingly common as competitors build increasingly powerful 
capabilities and approach their goal of building AGI. Universally, powerful 
stakeholders fight for their narrow interests, and for maintaining the status quo, 
and they often win, even when all of society is going to lose. Big Tobacco didn’t 
pause cigarette-making when they learned about lung cancer; instead they spread 
misinformation and hired lobbyists. Big Oil didn’t pause drilling when they learned 
about climate change; instead they spread misinformation and hired lobbyists. 
Likewise, now that billions of dollars are pouring into the creation of AGI and 
superintelligence, we’ve already seen competitors fight tooth and nail to keep 
 The Compendium | 65 

AI Governance
building. If problems arise in the future, of course they will fight for their narrow 
interests, just as industries always do. And as the AI industry gets larger, more 
entrenched, and more essential over time, this problem will grow rapidly worse. 
4.​ The reactive framework doesn’t put humanity in control of AI development. ​
Head of Safety at the US AISI Paul Christiano acknowledges that even very good 
reactive approaches inadequately address superintelligence risks, but argues that 
they are net beneficial and useful stepping stones to create other effective 
regulation:
I think the risk from rapid AI development is very large, and that even very good RSPs 
would not completely eliminate that risk. A durable, global, effectively enforced, and 
hardware-inclusive pause on frontier AI development would reduce risk further. I 
think this would be politically and practically challenging and would have major 
costs, so I don’t want it to be the only option on the table. I think implementing RSPs 
can get most of the benefit, is desirable according to a broader set of perspectives 
and beliefs, and helps facilitate other effective regulation.
But what is this “other effective regulation” and what does it lead to? Even if the 
reactive framework effectively manages to catch risks when they arise, it does not 
give humanity the necessary control of AI development in general, building the 
institutions necessary to be proactive. As AI becomes more powerful, what we need 
is not a whack-a-mole strategy, but a cautious, proactive approach to only develop 
AI we can guarantee is safe.  
The fact that the reactive framework inherently endorses the status quo should be a cause 
for concern, especially because many of its proponents acknowledge the risks of 
superintelligence. This is by design. 
 Current AI policy efforts endorse the race to AGI.
The actors helping define policy strategies are AGI companies themselves, many of whom 
are lobbying heavily against regulation while promoting their own safety frameworks. 
Coordination to prevent superintelligence risks is effectively impossible so long as the 
faction trying to build it controls the AI policy landscape. 
Over the past few months, AI discourse has had an increasingly nationalistic timbre. 
Consider Sam Altman’s recent op-ed, “Who will control the future of AI?”
 The Compendium | 66 

AI Governance
That is the urgent question of our time. The rapid progress being made on artificial 
intelligence means that we face a strategic choice about what kind of world we are going to 
live in: Will it be one in which the United States and allied nations advance a global AI that 
spreads the technology’s benefits and opens access to it, or an authoritarian one, in which 
nations or movements that don’t share our values use AI to cement and expand their power?
Here’s famous venture capitalist Vinod Khosla:
PESSIMISTS PAINT A DYSTOPIAN FUTURE IN TWO PARTS—ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL. They 
fear widespread job loss, economic inequality, social manipulation, erosion of human 
agency, loss of creativity, and even existential threats from AI. I believe these fears are 
largely unfounded, myopic, and harmful. They are addressable through societal choices. 
MOREOVER, THE REAL RISK ISN'T “SENTIENT AI” BUT LOSING THE AI RACE TO NEFARIOUS 
“NATION STATES,” OR OTHER BAD ACTORS, MAKING AI DANGEROUS FOR THE WEST. 
IRONICALLY, THOSE WHO FEAR AI AND ITS CAPACITY TO ERODE DEMOCRACY AND 
MANIPULATE SOCIETIES SHOULD BE MOST FEARFUL OF THIS RISK!
And Dario Amodei’s explanation of the “entente strategy,” revealing that the reactive 
framework is not about a delicate strategic path to creating safeguards, but greenlighting 
the current race to AGI:
On the international side, it seems very important that democracies have the upper hand on 
the world stage when powerful AI is created. AI-powered authoritarianism seems too terrible 
to contemplate, so democracies need to be able to set the terms by which powerful AI is 
brought into the world, both to avoid being overpowered by authoritarians and to prevent 
human rights abuses within authoritarian countries.
My current guess at the best way to do this is via an “entente strategy”, in which a coalition of 
democracies seeks to gain a clear advantage (even just a temporary one) on powerful AI by 
securing its supply chain, scaling quickly, and blocking or delaying adversaries’ access to 
key resources like chips and semiconductor equipment. This coalition would on one hand 
use AI to achieve robust military superiority (the stick) while at the same time offering to 
distribute the benefits of powerful AI (the carrot) to a wider and wider group of countries in 
exchange for supporting the coalition’s strategy to promote democracy (this would be a bit 
analogous to “Atoms for Peace”). The coalition would aim to gain the support of more and 
more of the world, isolating our worst adversaries and eventually putting them in a position 
where they are better off taking the same bargain as the rest of the world: give up 
competing with democracies in order to receive all the benefits and not fight a superior foe.
If we can do all this, we will have a world in which democracies lead on the world stage and 
have the economic and military strength to avoid being undermined, conquered, or 
sabotaged by autocracies, and may be able to parlay their AI superiority into a durable 
advantage. This could optimistically lead to an “eternal 1991”—a world where democracies 
have the upper hand and Fukuyama’s dreams are realized. Again, this will be very difficult to 
 The Compendium | 67 

AI Governance
achieve, and will in particular require close cooperation between private AI companies and 
democratic governments, as well as extraordinarily wise decisions about the balance 
between carrot and stick.
By arguing that the race to AGI is a race for “democracy to prevail over authoritarianism,” 
Sam Altman and Dario Amodei essentially advocate for acceleration, publicly calling for the 
US to “use AI to achieve robust military superiority.”
This perspective had led to AGI and hyperscaling compute companies to petition the 
government to accelerate AI development:
Today, as part of the Biden-Harris Administration’s comprehensive strategy for responsible 
innovation, the White House convened leaders from hyperscalers, artificial intelligence (AI) 
companies, datacenter operators, and utility companies to discuss steps to ensure the 
United States continues to lead the world in AI. Participants considered strategies to meet 
clean energy, permitting, and workforce requirements for developing large-scale AI 
datacenters and power infrastructure needed for advanced AI operations in the United 
States.
Just one month later, this acceleration led to the US government collaborating with those 
same companies to harness the power of AI for national security:
The National Security Memorandum (NSM) is designed to galvanize federal government 
adoption of AI to advance the national security mission, including by ensuring that such 
adoption reflects democratic values and protects human rights, civil rights, civil liberties and 
privacy. In addition, the NSM seeks to shape international norms around AI use to reflect 
those same democratic values, and directs actions to track and counter adversary 
development and use of AI for national security purposes.
The balance of power between the US and China is a legitimate issue, but the government 
should not use it to justify racing to AGI and superintelligence. The fact that they are is a 
narrative fed to them by AGI companies themselves, who urge governments for funding 
and support behind the scenes.
Stoking nation-state race dynamics undermines the precarious balance of international 
coordination, and could kill us all: Without having solved alignment, deploying powerful AI 
is effectively suicide. The hard questions of safety and alignment will not just go away on 
their own, and get even harder to solve in a geopolitically unstable world. 
Even if misaligned AGI is deployed by a “trusted” government, it is globally catastrophic, 
the equivalent of “winning a nuclear war that leaves the planet uninhabitable.” There are no 
winners in this situation.
 The Compendium | 68 

AI Governance
The only way to guarantee safety is for humanity to be in collective control of frontier AI 
development. This is a global solution which requires far-reaching monitoring regimes to 
prevent countries, companies, or rogue actors from pursuing building AGI and leading to 
the catastrophic outcomes above. 
As international AI Safety Institutes plan for an upcoming conference to make progress on 
Frontier AI Safety Frameworks, leading AGI actors will be in the room. These actors have 
made it transparent that their interest is in building AGI, arguing for voluntary commitments 
which do nothing to stop the race, pushing against regulation behind the scenes, and now 
invoking nationalistic language in order to defend their race. 
 The Compendium | 69 

The AI Race
 (6)  The AI Race.
 The race to AGI is ideological, and will drive us to the exact 
dangers it claims to avoid.
The current situation of AI development is paradoxical: 
●​ Humanity is on a default path toward increasingly powerful AI that risks causing our 
extinction, which key actors acknowledge.
●​ Those same major actors are racing towards this future with abandon; expert 
discourse is filled with pseudoscientific reassurances that discount the core issues; 
policy approaches fail to bind any of these actors to a safe future; and safety efforts 
assume that we will “muddle through” without putting in the necessary effort.
To make sense of this apparent contradiction, we must take a closer look at exactly how the 
AGI race is unfolding: Who are the participants? What are their motivations? What dynamics 
emerge from their beliefs and interactions? How does this translate to concrete actions, 
and how to make sense of these actions? Only by doing this can we understand where the 
AGI race is headed.
In The AGI race is ideologically driven, we sort the key actors by their ideology, explaining 
that the history of the race to AGI is rooted in “singularitarian” beliefs about using 
superintelligence to control the future. 
In These ideologies shape the playing field, we argue that the belief that whoever controls 
AGI controls the future leads to fear that the “wrong people” will end up building AGI first, 
leading to a race dominated by actors who are willing to neglect any risk or issue that might 
slow them down. 
In The strategies being used to justify and perpetuate the race to AGI are not new, we argue 
that in order to reach their goals of building AGI first, the AGI companies and their allies are 
simply applying the usual industry playbook strategies from Tobacco, Oil, Big Tech, to 
create confusion and fear they then use to wrestle control of the policy and scientific 
establishment. That way, there is nothing in their way as they race with abandon to AGI.
In How will this go?, we argue that the race, driven by ideologies that want to build AG, will 
continue. There is no reason for any of the actors to change their tack, especially given their 
current success.
 The Compendium | 70 

The AI Race
  The AGI race is ideologically driven.
Studying the motivations of the participants clarifies their interactions and the dynamics of 
the race.
For the AGI race, the actors fit into five groups:18
●​ Utopists, who are the main drivers of the race, and want to build AGI in order to 
control the future and usher in the utopia they want.
●​ Big Tech, who started by supporting the utopists, are now in the process of 
absorbing and consuming them to keep their technological monopolies.
●​ Accelerationists, who want to accelerate and deregulate technological progress 
because they think it is an unmitigated good.
●​ Zealots, who want to build AGI and superintelligence because they believe it’s the 
superior species that should control the future.
●​ Opportunists, who just follow the hype without having any strong belief about it.
Utopists: Building AGI to usher in utopia
This group is the main driver of the AGI race, and are actively pushing for development in 
order to build their vision of utopia. AGI companies include DeepMind, OpenAI, Anthropic, 
and xAI (and Meta, though we class them more as accelerationists below). A second, 
overlapping cluster of utopists support the “entente strategy,” including influential 
members of the philanthropic foundation Open Philanthropy and think tank RAND, as well 
as leadership from AGI companies, like Sam Altman and Dario Amodei.
The ideology that binds these actors together is the belief that AGI promises absolute 
power over the future to whoever builds it, and the desire to wield that power so they 
can usher in their favorite flavor of utopia.
AGI companies
Companies usually come together in order to make profit: building a new technology is 
often a means to make money, not the goal itself. But in the case of AGI, the opposite is 
true. AGI companies have been created explicitly to build AGI, and use products and 
money as a way to further this goal. It is clear from their histories and from their explicit 
statements about why AGI matters that this is the case.
18 These groups are not perfectly mutually exclusive, and there is some ambiguity and overlap 
between organizations and individuals of different groups.
 The Compendium | 71 

The AI Race
All AGI companies have their roots in Singularitarianism, a turn-of-the-century online 
movement which focused on building AGI and reaping the benefits.
Before singularitarians, AGI and its potential power and implications were mostly discussed 
in papers by scientific luminaries:
●​ Alan Turing warned in 1951 that 
“once the machine thinking method had started, it would not take long to outstrip our feeble 
powers… at some stage therefore we should have to expect the machines to take control.”
●​ Later in the 1950’s John von Neumann discussed that​
“the ever accelerating progress of technology… give the appearance of approaching some 
essential singularity in the history of the race beyond which human affairs, as we know them, 
could not continue.”
●​ In the 1960s, mathematician I. J. Good introduced the idea of AI "intelligence 
explosion" in which advanced AI improves itself to superhuman levels, similar to 
what is described in Section 3 on AI Catastrophe.
But in the year 2000, the term “Singularitarianism” was coined to describe the ideology of 
individuals who took these ideas seriously – not as science fiction, but as the secular belief 
that superintelligence will likely be built in the future, and that deliberate action ought to be 
taken to ensure this benefits humans.19 It was in these individuals where the ideology 
behind the current race for AGI found its beginnings. Eliezer Yudkowsky, an early 
representative Singulatarians, writes in the (deleted) Singularitarian Principles that:
Singularitarians are the partisans of the Singularity.​
A 
Singularitarian 
is 
someone 
who 
believes 
that 
technologically 
creating 
a 
greater-than-human intelligence is desirable, and who works to that end.​
A Singularitarian is advocate, agent, defender, and friend of the future known as the 
Singularity.
In one way or another, each of the utopists emerged from the Singularitarians.
DeepMind was founded by two early Singularitarians, Demis Hassabis and Shane Legg, 
who met their first investor, Peter Thiel, through a party organized by Eliezer Yudkowsky’s 
19 A deeper history of the transhumanist movement can be found here.
 The Compendium | 72 

The AI Race
Singularity Institute.20 In book Genius Makers, Cade Metz tracks the history of the early AGI 
race:
 
In recent years, Legg had joined an annual gathering of futurists called the Singularity 
Summit. “The Singularity” is the (theoretical) moment when technology improves to the 
point where it can no longer be controlled by the human race. [...] One of the founders was a 
self-educated philosopher and self-described artificial intelligence researcher named 
Eliezer Yudkowsky, who had introduced Legg to the idea of superintelligence in the early 
2000s when they were working with a New York–based start-up called Intelligensis. But 
Hassabis and Legg had their eyes on one of the other [Singularity Summit] conference 
founders: Peter Thiel.​
In the summer of 2010, Hassabis and Legg arranged to address the Singularity Summit, 
knowing that each speaker would be invited to a private party at Thiel’s town house in San 
Francisco.
Demis Hassabis soon converted Elon Musk to the potential and dangers of AGI and 
secured additional funding from him, by highlighting how Musk’s dream of colonizing Mars 
could be jeopardized by AGI. The New York Times reports that:
Mr. Musk explained that his plan was to colonize Mars to escape overpopulation and other 
dangers on Earth. Dr. Hassabis replied that the plan would work — so long as superintelligent 
machines didn’t follow and destroy humanity on Mars, too.​
Mr. Musk was speechless. He hadn’t thought about that particular danger. Mr. Musk soon 
invested in DeepMind alongside Mr. Thiel so he could be closer to the creation of this 
technology.
In 2015, Google acquired DeepMind, which liquidated Elon Musk from the company. Musk’s 
disagreements with Larry Page over building AGI for “religious” reasons (discussed further 
in the zealots subsection) pushed Musk to join forces with Sam Altman and launch OpenAI, 
as discussed in released emails.
In 2021, history repeated itself: Anthropic was founded to compete with OpenAI in 
response to the latter’s deal with Microsoft. The founders of Anthropic included brother 
and sister Dario and Daniela Amodei. Dario was one of the researchers invited to the dinner 
that led to the founding of OpenAI, as noted by co-founder Greg Brockman in a 
since-deleted blog post: 
20 Eliezer himself corroborates this history, noting "I obviously did not forecast the consequences 
correctly." To his credit, while many of these early singularitarians have gone on to lead the AGI race, 
Eliezer pivoted and went directly into working on AI alignment and writing about the risks from 
superintelligence.
 The Compendium | 73 

The AI Race
About a month later, Sam [Altman] set up a dinner in Menlo Park. On the list were Dario 
[Amodei], Chris [Olah], Paul [Christiano], Ilya Sutskever, Elon Musk, Sam, and a few others.21
And in two blog posts entitled “Machine Intelligence”, Sam Altman thanks Dario Amodei 
specifically for helping him come to grips with questions related to AGI:
Thanks to Dario Amodei (especially Dario), Paul Buchheit, Matt Bush, Patrick Collison, Holden 
Karnofsky, Luke Muehlhauser, and Geoff Ralston for reading drafts of this and the previous 
post.
Elon Musk re-entered the race in 2023, founding xAI, with the stated goal of “trying to 
understand the universe.”
This ideology of building AGI to usher the Singularity and Utopia was thus foundational for 
all these companies. In addition, the leaders of these companies have also stated that they 
believe in the extreme importance to the future of AGI, and who builds it:
●​ DeepMind co-founder Shane Legg writes in his PhD thesis,​
“If our intelligence were to be significantly surpassed, it is difficult to imagine what the 
consequences of this might be. It would certainly be a source of enormous power, and with 
enormous power comes enormous responsibility.​
●​ DeepMind co-founder Demis Hassabis is quoted by The Guardian as saying that​
“he is on a mission to “solve intelligence, and then use that to solve everything else”. ​
●​ OpenAI’s co-founder and CEO Sam Altman wrote in a public OpenAI plan that ​
“Successfully transitioning to a world with superintelligence is perhaps the most 
important—and hopeful, and scary—project in human history.“​
●​ OpenAI co-founder Greg Brockman agrees, writing in a deleted blog post that​
“ there was one problem that I could imagine happily working on for the rest of my life: 
moving humanity to safe human-level AI. It’s hard to imagine anything more amazing and 
positively impactful than successfully creating AI, so long as it’s done in a good way.”​
●​ Anthropic co-founder and CEO Dario Amodei stated in a recent blog post that 
building AGI​
“[building AGI] is a world worth fighting for. If all of this really does happen over 5 to 10 
years—the defeat of most diseases, the growth in biological and cognitive freedom, the 
21 Note that these individuals all continue to have prominent influence over the race to AGI and the 
field of AI safety.
 The Compendium | 74 

The AI Race
lifting of billions of people out of poverty to share in the new technologies, a renaissance of 
liberal democracy and human rights—I suspect everyone watching it will be surprised by the 
effect it has on them.”​
●​ This commitment is reiterated in Anthropic’s Core Views on AI Safety, positing that​
“most or all knowledge work may be automatable in the not-too-distant future – this will 
have profound implications for society, and will also likely change the rate of progress of 
other technologies as well (an early example of this is how systems like AlphaFold are already 
speeding up biology today). …it is hard to overstate what a pivotal moment this could be.”
An email to OpenAI founders from Musk most ominously and succinctly summarizes the 
utopist position: “humanity’s future” is in the hands of whoever wins the race to AGI:
Entente 
Aside from racing to build AGI, utopists have also started to tie their own goals (ushering 
what they see as a good future) with the stated and ideal aims of existing cultures and 
governments, notably democracy and the US government.
This is true for AGI companies, for example with OpenAI CEO Sam Alman writing in a recent 
op-ed that:
There is no third option — and it’s time to decide which path to take. The United States 
currently has a lead in AI development, but continued leadership is far from guaranteed. 
Authoritarian governments the world over are willing to spend enormous amounts of money 
to catch up and ultimately overtake us. Russian dictator Vladimir Putin has darkly warned that 
the country that wins the AI race will “become the ruler of the world,” and the People’s 
Republic of China has said that it aims to become the global leader in AI by 2030.
 The Compendium | 75 

The AI Race
Ex-OpenAI superalignment researcher Leopold Aschenbrenner echoes this sentiment in 
Situational Awareness:
Every month of lead will matter for safety too. We face the greatest risks if we are locked in a 
tight race, democratic allies and authoritarian competitors each racing through the already 
precarious intelligence explosion at breakneck pace—forced to throw any caution by the 
wayside, fearing the other getting superintelligence first. Only if we preserve a healthy lead 
of democratic allies will we have the margin of error for navigating the extraordinarily 
volatile and dangerous period around the emergence of superintelligence. And only 
American leadership is a realistic path to developing a nonproliferation regime to avert the 
risks of self-destruction superintelligence will unfold.
Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei provides the clearest description of this approach, under the 
name “entente strategy”:
My current guess at the best way to do this is via an “entente strategy”, in which a coalition of 
democracies seeks to gain a clear advantage (even just a temporary one) on powerful AI by 
securing its supply chain, scaling quickly, and blocking or delaying adversaries’ access to 
key resources like chips and semiconductor equipment. This coalition would on one hand 
use AI to achieve robust military superiority (the stick) while at the same time offering to 
distribute the benefits of powerful AI (the carrot) to a wider and wider group of countries in 
exchange for supporting the coalition’s strategy to promote democracy (this would be a bit 
analogous to “Atoms for Peace”). The coalition would aim to gain the support of more and 
more of the world, isolating our worst adversaries and eventually putting them in a position 
where they are better off taking the same bargain as the rest of the world: give up 
competing with democracies in order to receive all the benefits and not fight a superior foe.
If we can do all this, we will have a world in which democracies lead on the world stage and 
have the economic and military strength to avoid being undermined, conquered, or 
sabotaged by autocracies, and may be able to parlay their AI superiority into a durable 
advantage. This could optimistically lead to an “eternal 1991”—a world where democracies 
have the upper hand and Fukuyama’s dreams are realized.
That is, the democracies leading the AGI race (mostly the US) need to rush ahead in order to 
control the future, leading to an “eternal 1991.”​
The more communication-and-policy focused entente strategy has also involved different 
utopists than AGI companies. Amodei also explicitly credits the think tank RAND with the 
name “entente strategy” and the rough idea:
This is the title of a forthcoming paper from RAND, that lays out roughly the strategy I 
describe.
 The Compendium | 76 

The AI Race
RAND, an influential think tank created at the end of WWII, has been heavily involved with 
the Biden administration to draft executive orders on AI. Yet it clearly predates the 
singularitarians of the early 2000s – AI and AGI were not part of its founding goals; instead, 
RAND took up these topics after Jason Matheny was appointed CEO in 2022.
Matheny is tied with the effective altruism (EA), a movement that combined traditional 
philanthropy with various causes, from animal rights to risks from AI, and grew in part out of 
the rationalist community that had originated from Yudkowsky’s Singularitarians. Indeed, 
RAND has been bankrolled since 2022 by Open Philanthropy, the main non-profit funding 
effective altruism causes, offering a total of $18.5 millions to RAND for potential risks from 
AIs22, all to be “spent at RAND President Jason Matheny’s discretion.”
This is not the first time Open Philanthropy directly supported utopist actors: In 2017, Open 
Philanthropy also recommended a grant of $30 million to OpenAI, arguing that 
it’s fairly likely that OpenAI will be an extraordinarily important organization, with far more 
influence over how things play out than organizations that focus exclusively on risk reduction 
and do not advance the state of the art.
In the “relationship disclosure” section, Open Philanthropy nods to the conflict of interest:
OpenAI researchers Dario Amodei and Paul Christiano are both technical advisors to Open 
Philanthropy and live in the same house as Holden. In addition, Holden is engaged to Dario’s 
sister Daniela.
“Holden” is Holden Karnofsky, who was Open Philanthropy’s former executive director and 
former Director of AI Strategy. That is, the then-director of Open Philanthropy lived with the 
future CEO of Anthropic, and married the future president of Anthropic. Although Open 
Philanthropy hasn’t funded Anthropic directly, the $500 millions invested by Sam 
Bankman-Fried before his downfall were influenced by EA23, for which Open Philanthropy 
was and is the most important and powerful organization in that movement. 
In conclusion, for the last 10 years, what has motivated both leading AGI companies and the 
most powerful non-profits and NGOs working on AI-risks has been the ideology AGI will 
usher in utopia, and offer massive control of the future to whoever wields it.
23 This donation was also advised by Leopold Aschenbrenner, author of "Situational Awareness," who 
was working at FTX Future Fund at the time.
22 Three public grants from Open Philanthropy note donations over a short period of time (here, here, 
and here) 
 The Compendium | 77 

The AI Race
Now, the ideology of "AI will grant unlimited power" has taken a nationalistic turn, and 
started to find its footing in the entente strategy. While entente may look like a new 
ideology, it's really the same utopists coming up with a slightly different story to justify the 
race to AGI.
Big Tech: Keeping a hand on the technological frontier
The group in the AGI race with the most resources are the Big Tech companies directly 
investing in the AGI companies and striving for a monopoly of this new technology. These 
include Microsoft, Google, Amazon, Elon Musk’s empire, Meta and Apple. 
Big Tech companies are used to monopolies and controlling the technological frontier, 
having dominated the internet, mobile, and cloud computing markets; they’re doing the 
same with AI, partnering and investing in the utopists’ smaller companies and making them 
dependent on their extensive resources.
Each of the utopists is backed by at least one of the Big Tech actors: 
●​ DeepMind was acquired by Google; 
●​ OpenAI is enabled by a cumulative $13 billions of investment from Microsoft and 
uses their infrastructure; 
●​ Anthropic received $4 billion of investment from Amazon, as well as $2 billion from 
Google; 
●​ xAI is enabled by the investments of Elon Musk, who controls the X empire of Tesla, 
SpaceX, etc.
Big Tech companies play a unique role in the AGI race, bankrolling the utopists and 
exploiting their progress. They were not founded in order to build AGI, and did not start the 
AGI race – yet the traction towards AGI eventually got their attention.
For example, Microsoft leadership invested and partnered with OpenAI because it was 
smelling AI progress passing by, and was unsatisfied with its internal AI teams. Kevin Scott, 
Microsoft’s CTO, wrote to CEO Satya Nadella and founder Bill Gates in 2019:
We have very smart ML people in Bing, in the vision team, and in the speech team. But the 
core deep learning teams within each of these bigger teams are very small, and their 
ambitions have also been constrained, which means that even as we start to feed them 
resources, they still have to go through a learning process to scale up. And we are multiple 
years behind the competition in terms of ML scale.
 The Compendium | 78 

The AI Race
And Apple, which is historically prone to building in-house rather than buying, recently 
announced a deal with OpenAI to use ChatGPT in order to power Siri.
Yet as usual in this kind of bargain, Big Tech is starting to reestablish their power and 
monopoly after depending for a while on the utopists. Not only are they the only one with 
the necessary resources to enable further scaling, but they also have had access to the 
technology of utopists and sometimes their teams:
●​ Google literally acquired DeepMind, and has merged it with their previous internal 
Google Brain, with final control over their research and results.
●​ Microsoft has intellectual property rights to OpenAI code, and the new CEO of 
Microsoft AI, ex-DeepMind co-founder Mustafa Suleyman, has been reportedly 
studying the algorithms.
●​ Amazon, despite its partnership with Anthropic, has been assembling a massive 
internal AI team.
●​ Meta, which never sponsored any utopists, has been consistently building and 
releasing the most powerful open-weight LLMs, the Llama family of models, for 
years now.
The utopists are enabled by the compute, scale, funding, and lobbying capacity of their Big 
Tech backers, who end up dodging public attention in the race to AGI while being one of 
the main driving forces. 
Accelerationists: Idolizing technological progress
Accelerationists believe that technology is an unmitigated good and that we must pursue 
the change it will bring about as aggressively as possible, eliminating any impediments or 
regulations. Accelerationists include many VCs, AGI company leaders, and software 
engineers; key players include Meta and venture capital fund Andreessen Horowitz (a16z).
A representative ode to accelerationism is The Techno-Optimist Manifesto by A16z 
co-founder Marc Andreessen. It opens by drumming up fervor that technology is what will 
save society, and critics of technology are what will damn it:
We are being lied to. / We are told that technology takes our jobs, reduces our wages, 
increases inequality, threatens our health, ruins the environment, degrades our society, 
corrupts our children, impairs our humanity, threatens our future, and is ever on the verge of 
ruining everything. / We are told to be angry, bitter, and resentful about technology. / We are 
told to be pessimistic. / The myth of Prometheus – in various updated forms like 
Frankenstein, Oppenheimer, and Terminator – haunts our nightmares. / We are told to 
denounce our birthright – our intelligence, our control over nature, our ability to build a better 
world. / We are told to be miserable about the future…
 The Compendium | 79 

The AI Race
Our civilization was built on technology. / Our civilization is built on technology. / Technology 
is the glory of human ambition and achievement, the spearhead of progress, and the 
realization of our potential. / For hundreds of years, we properly glorified this – until recently.
I am here to bring the good news.
We can advance to a far superior way of living, and of being. / We have the tools, the 
systems, the ideas. / We have the will. / It is time, once again, to raise the technology flag. / It 
is time to be Techno-Optimists.
While Andreessen is particularly dramatic with his language, accelerationism generally 
takes the form of pushing for libertarian futures in which risks from technology are 
managed purely by market forces rather than government regulation. As such, it’s 
particularly adamant about pushing for open-weight AIs, bringing dangerous technology 
to every possible criminal, terrorist and dictator in order to “ensure things go well”.
A common argument by accelerationists is that open-source makes software safer by 
having more eyes explore and inspect the source-code. See Andreessen’s recent post 
co-authored with Microsoft leadership:
[Open-Source AIs] also offer the promise of safety and security benefits, since they can be 
more widely scrutinized for vulnerabilities.
Yet this is profoundly misleading. First, as we articulated before, the AIs released by the 
likes of Meta and Mistral AI are not open-source: they don’t include everything necessary to 
train the model, such as the data and the training algorithm. This makes them open-weight, 
and thus much more opaque to the external user than they are to the internal developer. 
And even worse than that, recall that modern AIs are grown, not built; this means that even 
the very researchers who have created these AIs don’t know how they work, and how to fix 
them if there is a problem. So the main value of open-source software, of having many 
more eyeballs on the source code to find bugs and security exploits, vanishes because no 
one who looks at the numbers in a modern AI understands what they mean.
Another argument is simply the proposition that giving everyone a dangerous technology 
somehow makes it easier for governments and law-enforcement to control it. Indeed, 
Meta’s CEO Mark Zuckerberg makes this very claim in his defense of his company’s 
open-weight approach:
I think it will be better to live in a world where AI is widely deployed so that larger actors can 
check the power of smaller bad actors.
 The Compendium | 80 

The AI Race
And as we discussed above, this argument fails to address the asymmetric nature of the 
danger: it only takes one bad actor succeeding to create chaos, which forces governments 
and law-enforcement to catch every single threat, without making a single mistake or error. 
Just because accelerationists decided to give open-weights AI to criminals, terrorists, and 
rogue nations.
In the end, the goal of accelerationists is simply to avoid regulations on technology at all 
cost, since they see technology as such an unmitigated good. These beliefs leave no room 
for a calm and collected reflection of the potential risks of technology, and how to handle 
them properly.
Zealots: Worshiping superintelligence
The zealots believe AGI to be a superior successor to humanity that is akin to a god; they 
don’t want to build or control it themselves, but they do want it to arrive, even if humanity is 
dominated, destroyed, or replaced by it. 
Larry Page, co-founder of Google and key advocate of the DeepMind acquisition, is one 
such zealot. Elon Musk’s biographer detailed Page and Musk’s conflict at a dinner that 
broke up their friendship (emphasis ours):
Musk argued that unless we built in safeguards, artificial intelligence systems might replace 
humans, making our species irrelevant or even extinct.​
Page pushed back. Why would it matter, he asked, if machines someday surpassed 
humans in intelligence, even consciousness? It would simply be the next stage of 
evolution.​
Human consciousness, Musk retorted, was a precious flicker of light in the universe, and we 
should not let it be extinguished. Page considered that sentimental nonsense. If 
consciousness could be replicated in a machine, why would that not be just as valuable? 
Perhaps we might even be able someday to upload our own consciousness into a machine. 
He accused Musk of being a “specist,” someone who was biased in favor of their own 
species. “Well, yes, I am pro-human,” Musk responded. “I fucking like humanity, dude.”
Another is Richard Sutton, one of the fathers of modern Reinforcement Learning, who 
articulated his own zealotry in his AI Succession presentation:
We should not resist succession, but embrace and prepare for it / Why would we want 
greater beings kept subservient? / Why don't we rejoice in their greatness as a symbol and 
extension of humanity’s greatness, and work together toward a greater and inclusive 
civilization?
 The Compendium | 81 

The AI Race
Another father of AI, Jurgen Schmidhuber, believes that AI will inevitably become more 
intelligent than humanity:
In the year 2050 time won’t stop, but we will have AIs who are more intelligent than we are 
and will see little point in getting stuck to our bit of the biosphere. They will want to move 
history to the next level and march out to where the resources are. In a couple of million 
years, they will have colonised the Milky Way.”
Despite this, he disregards the risks, assuming that this all will happen while humanity plods 
along. The Guardian reports: “Schmidhuber believes AI will advance to the point where it 
surpasses human intelligence and has no interest in humans – while humans will continue to 
benefit and use the tools developed by AI.”
Whether we are replaced by successor species or simply hand over the future to them, 
zealots believe the coming AI takeover is inevitable and humanity should step out of the 
way. While the zealots represent a minority in the AGI race, they’ve had massive influence: 
Page and Musk’s conflict led to Google’s acquisition of DeepMind and thus the creation of 
OpenAI and, and arguably catalyzed the creation of Anthropic and xAI.
Opportunists: Following the hype
This last group comprises everyone who joined the AGI race and AI industry not because of 
a particular ideology, but in order to ride the wave of hype and investment, and get money, 
status, power from it.
This heterogeneous group includes smaller actors in the AI space, such as Mistral AI and 
Cohere; hardware manufacturers, such as Nvidia and AMD; startups riding the wave of AI 
progress, such as Perplexity and Cursor; established tech companies integrating AIs into 
their products, such as Zoom and Zapier; older companies trying to stay relevant to the AI 
world, such as Cisco and IBM.
Most of the core progress towards AGI has been driven by utopists and Big Tech, not 
opportunists following the hype. Nonetheless, their crowding into the market has fueled 
the recent AI boom, and built the infrastructure on which it takes place. 
 These ideologies shape the playing field.
Motivated by their convictions, the utopists are setting the rapid pace of the AGI race 
despite publicly acknowledging the risks. 
 The Compendium | 82 

The AI Race
Because they believe that AGI is possible and that building it leads to control of the future, 
they must be the first to protect humanity from the “wrong people” beating them to the 
punch. Utopists worry about AGI being built by someone naive or incompetent, 
inadvertently triggering catastrophe; per Ashlee Vance’s biography of Musk, this was 
Musk’s underlying concern in his disagreement with Larry Page: ​
He opened up about the major fear keeping him up at night: namely that Google’s 
co-founder 
and 
CEO 
Larry 
Page 
might 
well 
have 
been building a fleet of 
artificial-intelligence-enhanced robots capable of destroying mankind. “I’m really worried 
about this,” Musk said. It didn’t make Musk feel any better that he and Page were very close 
friends and that he felt Page was fundamentally a well-intentioned person and not Dr. Evil. In 
fact, that was sort of the problem. Page’s nice-guy nature left him assuming that the 
machines would forever do our bidding. “I’m not as optimistic,” Musk said. “He could 
produce something evil by accident.”
Utopists also consider anyone with opposing values to be the wrong people. This includes 
foreign adversaries such as China and Russia. Sam Altman writes in a recent op-ed that:
There is no third option — and it’s time to decide which path to take. The United States 
currently has a lead in AI development, but continued leadership is far from guaranteed. 
Authoritarian governments the world over are willing to spend enormous amounts of money 
to catch up and ultimately overtake us. Russian dictator Vladimir Putin has darkly warned that 
the country that wins the AI race will “become the ruler of the world,” and the People’s 
Republic of China has said that it aims to become the global leader in AI by 2030.
This is also the main thrust of the “entente strategy”: democracies must race to AGI lest 
they be overtaken by dictatorships.
This dynamic creates an arms race, where staying in the lead matters more than everything 
else. This has been a recurring motif throughout the AGI race: OpenAI was built because 
Elon Musk wanted to overtake DeepMind after Google’s acquisition; Anthropic wanted to 
outdo OpenAI after the latter made a deal with Microsoft; and xAI is yet another attempt by 
Elon Musk to get back in the race.
This is why those at the forefront of the AGI race (mainly OpenAI and Anthropic) end up 
being the people most willing to throw away safety in order to make a move. As a telling 
example, Anthropic released Claude, which they proudly (and correctly) described as 
pushing the state-of-the-art, contradicting their own Core Views on AI Safety, which 
promised “We generally don’t publish this kind of work because we do not wish to advance 
the rate of AI capabilities progress.”
 The Compendium | 83 

The AI Race
Over time, anyone willing to slow for safety is weeded out, like OpenAI leaders Jan Leike 
and Ilya Sutskever from OpenAI’s Superalignment Team. Jan Leike explained his quitting by 
complaining that he didn’t have enough support and resources for doing his work on 
safety:
Over the past few months my team has been sailing against the wind. Sometimes we were 
struggling for compute and it was getting harder and harder to get this crucial research 
done.​
[...]​
But over the past years, safety culture and processes have taken a backseat to shiny 
products.”
The tendency to rationalize away the risks is best captured by Situational Awareness, a 
report written by an ex-OpenAI employee, Leopold Aschenbrenner. He articulates his 
concern about future risks and the inadequate mediation measures:
We’re not on track for a sane chain of command to make any of these insanely high-stakes 
decisions, to insist on the very-high-confidence appropriate for superintelligence, to make 
the hard decisions to take extra time before launching the next training run to get safety right 
or dedicate a large majority of compute to alignment research, to recognize danger ahead 
and avert it rather than crashing right into it. Right now, no lab has demonstrated much of a 
willingness to make any costly tradeoffs to get safety right (we get lots of safety 
committees, yes, but those are pretty meaningless). By default, we’ll probably stumble into 
the intelligence explosion and have gone through a few OOMs before people even realize 
what we’ve gotten into.​
We’re counting way too much on luck here.
On the very next page, he then contends that (emphasis ours):
Every month of lead will matter for safety too. We face the greatest risks if we are locked in a 
tight race, democratic allies and authoritarian competitors each racing through the already 
precarious intelligence explosion at breakneck pace—forced to throw any caution by the 
wayside, fearing the other getting superintelligence first. Only if we preserve a healthy lead 
of democratic allies will we have the margin of error for navigating the extraordinarily 
volatile and dangerous period around the emergence of superintelligence. And only 
American leadership is a realistic path to developing a nonproliferation regime to avert the 
risks of self-destruction superintelligence will unfold.
This is the gist of the AGI race: fear makes the very people worried about risks from AGI race 
even faster and deprioritize safety, arguing that they will eventually stop and do things 
 The Compendium | 84 

The AI Race
correctly when they finally feel safe. Ironically, this very attitude creates more competitors, 
more people racing for AGI, and ensures it truly is a race to the bottom.. 
Utopists are the core drivers of the race to AGI, but the ideology of every other group adds 
fuel to the fire. Big Tech is investing billions in order to capture this powerful new 
technology on the horizon; accelerationists spread AIs and AI research everywhere and 
undermine any regulation, bringing about the worst nightmare of the utopists and making 
them race even faster; zealots praise the coming of godly AIs; and opportunists enmesh 
themselves with the whole race to AGI, increasing the attention, funding, infrastructure and 
support it gets.  
 The strategies being used to justify and perpetuate the race 
to AGI are not new.
The AGI race favors actors who are willing to ignore or downplay risk. However, leading 
utopists are also well aware of AI’s existential risk: the CEOs of DeepMind, OpenAI, and 
Anthropic, as well as Dustin Moskovitz, the main funder of Open Philanthropy, signed a 
statement in 2023 stating that “Mitigating the risk of extinction from AI should be a global 
priority alongside other societal-scale risks such as pandemics and nuclear war.” Elon Musk 
signed an open letter to pause giant AI experiments.
The above analysis clarifies what is happening: since the utopists actually want to build AGI, 
and that they’re the ones most willing to throw safety under the bus, they are simply using 
the industry playbook of Big Tech, Big Oil, Big Tobacco, etc., to reach their goal, while 
pretending to champion safety. 
The Industry Playbook
At its core, the industry playbook is about getting obstacles out of one’s way, be they 
competitors, the public, or the government.
The main strategy is FUD, for Fear, Uncertainty and Doubt: it helps anyone who benefits 
from the status quo (usually “inaction”), when they need to fend off something menacing 
this status quo.
For example, an industry sells a product (tobacco, asbestos, social media, etc.) that harms 
people, and some are starting to notice and make noise about it. Denying the harms may 
be impossible or could draw more attention to them, so industrial actors opt to spread 
confusion instead: they accuse others of lying or being in the pockets of shadowy 
adversaries, drown the public in tons of junk data that is hard to evaluate, bore people with 
 The Compendium | 85 

The AI Race
minutia to redirect public attention, or argue that the science is nascent, controversial, or 
premature. In short, they waste as much time and energy of their opponents and the 
general public as possible.
This delays countermeasures and buys the incumbent time. And, if they’re lucky, it might be 
enough to outlast the underfunded pro-civil adversaries as they run out of funding or 
public attention.
The canonical example of FUD comes from tobacco: as documented in a history of 
tobacco industry tactics, John W. Hill, the president of the leading public relations firm at 
the time, published his recommendations in 1953 as experts began to understand the 
dangers of smoking (emphasis ours):
So he proposed seizing and controlling science rather than avoiding it. If science posed the 
principal—even terminal—threat to the industry, Hill advised that the companies should now 
associate themselves as great supporters of science. The companies, in his view, should 
embrace a sophisticated scientific discourse; they should demand more science, not 
less.
Of critical importance, Hill argued, they should declare the positive value of scientific 
skepticism of science itself. Knowledge, Hill understood, was hard won and uncertain, and 
there would always be skeptics. What better strategy than to identify, solicit, support, and 
amplify the views of skeptics of the causal relationship between smoking and disease? 
Moreover, the liberal disbursement of tobacco industry research funding to academic 
scientists could draw new skeptics into the fold. The goal, according to Hill, would be to 
build and broadcast a major scientific controversy. The public must get the message that 
the issue of the health effects of smoking remains an open question. Doubt, uncertainty, 
and the truism that there is more to know would become the industry's collective new 
mantra.
FUD is so effective the CIA recommended it to intelligence operatives in WWII – the Simple 
Sabotage Field Manual abounds with tactics that are meant to slow down, exhaust, and 
confuse, while maintaining plausible deniability:
When possible, refer all matters to committees, for "further study and consideration." 
Attempt to make the committees as large as possible - never less than five.​
Bring up irrelevant issues as frequently as possible.​
Haggle over precise wordings of communications, minutes, resolutions.​
Refer back to matters decided upon at the last meeting and attempt to re-open the 
question of the advisability of that decision.​
 The Compendium | 86 

The AI Race
Advocate "caution." Be “reasonable" and urge your fellow-conferees to be "reasonable" 
and avoid haste which might result in embarrassments or difficulties later on.
FUD also encourages and exploits the industry funding of scientific research. A recent 
review of the influence of industry funding on research describes the practice (emphasis 
ours):
Qualitative and quantitative studies included in our review suggest that industry also used 
research funding as a strategy to reshape fields of research through the prioritization of 
topics that supported its policy and legal positions, while distracting from research that 
could be unfavorable. Analysis of internal industry documents provides insight into how and 
why industry influenced research agendas. It is particularly interesting to note how 
corporations adopted similar techniques across different industry sectors (i.e., tobacco, 
alcohol, sugar, and mining) and fields of research. The strategies included establishing 
research agendas within the industry that were favorable to its positions, strategically 
funding research along these lines in a way that appeared scientifically credible, and 
disseminating these research agendas by creating collaborations with prominent 
institutions and researchers.
That being said, FUD only works because the default path is to preserve the risky product; it 
would be ineffective if the default strategy was instead to wait for scientific consensus to 
declare the product safe.
To avoid this, the industry playbook encourages self-regulation. If the industry must 
regulate itself, then it cannot act until something bad happens, and then when it happens 
they actively FUD to outrun regulation forever.
Facebook has followed this playbook, repeatedly pushing against government regulation, 
as demonstrated in their interactions with the European Commission in 2017 (emphasis 
ours):
​In January 2017, Facebook referred only to its terms of service when explaining decisions on 
whether or not to remove content, the documents show. “Facebook explained that referring 
to the terms of services allows faster action but are open to consider changes,” a 
Commission summary report from then reads.
“Facebook considers there are two sets of laws: private law (Facebook community 
standards) and public law (defined by governments),” the company told the Commission, 
according to Commission minutes of an April 2017 meeting.
“Facebook discouraged regulation,” reads a Commission memo summarizing a September 
2017 meeting with the company.
 The Compendium | 87 

The AI Race
The decision to press forward with the argument is unusual, said Margarida Silva, a researcher 
and campaigner at Corporate Europe Observatory. “You don’t see that many companies so 
openly asking for self-regulation, even going to the extent of defending private law.”
Facebook says it has taken the Commission’s concerns into account. “When people sign up 
to our terms of service, they commit to not sharing anything that breaks these policies, but 
also any content that is unlawful,” the company told POLITICO. “When governments or law 
enforcement believe that something on Facebook violates their laws, even if it doesn’t 
violate our standards, they may contact us to restrict access to that content.”
Unsurprisingly, this did not work, as a recent FTC report shows:
A new Federal Trade Commission staff report that examines the data collection and use 
practices of major social media and video streaming services shows they engaged in vast 
surveillance of consumers in order to monetize their personal information while failing to 
adequately protect users online, especially children and teens.
Last but not least, FUD itself, particularly fear, can help with defending self-regulation. This 
is the standard technique used by industries to get governments off their backs: scream 
that regulating them will destroy the country’s competitiveness and allow other countries 
(maybe even the enemy of the time, then USSR, now China) to catch up.
This is visible for example in the unified front by big tech against the new head of F.T.C. Lina 
Khan, who vowed to curb monopolies through regulation and antitrust law.
What’s most tricky about the industry playbook in general, and FUD in particular, is that 
individual actions can always be made sensible and reasonable on the surface — they push 
for and worry about science, innovation, consumers, competitiveness, and all the other 
sacred words of modernity. They sound reasonable, and almost civic-minded. And this 
makes criticizing them even harder, because pointing at any single action fails to unearth 
the strategy.
Instead, the industry playbook reveals itself when we look at the whole pattern, not at one 
action but at all the actions together. If someone hits you once, it might be a genuine 
mistake; if they repeatedly hit you “by accident”, they’re obviously trying to hit you.
If we come back to what the utopists and their allies have been doing, we see the same 
story: each action can independently be justified one way or the other. Yet taking them 
together reveals a general pattern of systematically undermining safety and regulation, 
notably through:
 The Compendium | 88 

The AI Race
●​ Spreading confusion through misinformation and double-speak
●​ Exploiting fear of AI risks to accelerate even further
●​ Capturing and neutralizing both regulation and AI safety efforts
Spreading confusion through misinformation and double-speak
It should be cause for concern that the utopists are willing to spread misinformation, and 
go back on their commitments, and outright lie to stay on the frontline of the race.
An egregious recent example is how, in his opening remarks at a Senate hearing, OpenAI 
CEO’s Sam Altman deliberately contradicted his past position to avoid a difficult 
conversation about AI x-risks with Senator Blumenthal, who quoted his Machine 
Intelligence blog post:
You have said ‘development of superhuman machine intelligence is probably the greatest 
threat to the continued existence of humanity’; you may have had in mind the effect on jobs, 
which is really my biggest nightmare in the long term.
Altman then responds:
Like with all technological revolutions, I expect there to be significant impact on jobs, but 
exactly what that impact looks like is very difficult to predict.
This is misdirecting attention from what Altman has historically written. The original text of 
Altman’s blog post reads:
The development of superhuman machine intelligence is probably the greatest threat to the 
continued existence of humanity. There are other threats that I think are more certain to 
happen (for example, an engineered virus with a long incubation period and a high mortality 
rate) but are unlikely to destroy every human in the universe in the way that SMI [Superhuman 
Machine Intelligence] could.
Altman’s response distorts the meaning of his original post, and instead runs with the 
misunderstanding of Blumenthal.
Similarly, in his more recent writing Altman has pulled back from his previous position on AGI 
risks and continues to downplay the risks by only addressing AI’s impact to the labor 
market:
As we have seen with other technologies, there will also be downsides, and we need to start 
working now to maximize AI’s benefits while minimizing its harms. As one example, we expect 
that this technology can cause a significant change in labor markets (good and bad) in the 
 The Compendium | 89 

The AI Race
coming years, but most jobs will change more slowly than most people think, and I have no 
fear that we’ll run out of things to do (even if they don’t look like “real jobs” to us today).
Altman simply changed his tune whenever it helped him, shifting from extinction risk to 
labor, claiming this was what he meant all along.
Anthropic has also explicitly raced and pushed the state-of-the-art after reassuring 
everyone that they would prioritize safety. Historically, Anthropic asserted that their focus 
on safety means that they wouldn’t advance the frontier of capabilities:
We generally don’t publish this kind of work because we do not wish to advance the rate of 
AI capabilities progress. In addition, we aim to be thoughtful about demonstrations of 
frontier capabilities (even without publication).
Yet they released the Claude 3 family of models, noting themselves that:
Opus, our most intelligent model, outperforms its peers on most of the common evaluation 
benchmarks for AI systems, including undergraduate level expert knowledge (MMLU), 
graduate level expert reasoning (GPQA), basic mathematics (GSM8K), and more. It exhibits 
near-human levels of comprehension and fluency on complex tasks, leading the frontier of 
general intelligence.
Anthropic’s leaked pitch deck in 2023 is another example, with the AGI company stating 
that it plans to build models “orders of magnitude” larger than competitors. They write: 
“These models could begin to automate large portions of the economy,” and “we believe 
that companies that train the best 2025/26 models will be too far ahead for anyone to 
catch up in subsequent cycles.” These statements evidence that despite arguments about 
restraint and safety, Anthropic is just as motivated to race for AGI as their peers. 
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis has been similarly inconsistent, arguing that AGI risks are 
legitimate and demanding regulation and a slowdown, while simultaneously leading 
DeepMind’s effort to catch up to ChatGPT and Claude. Elon Musk has also consistently 
argued that AI poses serious risks, despite being the driving force between both OpenAI 
and xAI. 
These contradictory actions lead to huge public confusion, with some onlookers even 
arguing that concerns about x-risk are a commercial hype strategy. But the reality is the 
opposite: the utopists understand that AGI will be such an incredibly powerful technology 
that they are willing to cut corners to reach it first. Today, even if these actors can signal 
concern, history gives us no reason to believe they would ever prioritize safety over racing.
 The Compendium | 90 

The AI Race
Turning care into acceleration
Recall that uncertainty and fear are essential components of FUD, and the whole industry 
playbook: by emphasizing uncertainty on one hand, and fear on the other, the status quo 
can be maintained.
In this case, utopists have managed to turn both the uncertainty about the details of AGI 
risks, and the fear of it being done by the “wrong” people, into two more excuses to 
maintain the status quo of racing as fast as possible.
First, they have been leveraging the uncertainty around the risks from AI as an argument to 
race to AGI, just so it’s possible to iterate and be empirical about them:
●​ OpenAI’s Planning for AGI argues that because it’s hard to anticipate AI capabilities, 
it’s best to move fast and keep iterating and releasing models:
“We currently believe the best way to successfully navigate AI deployment challenges is 
with a tight feedback loop of rapid learning and careful iteration. Society will face major 
questions about what AI systems are allowed to do, how to combat bias, how to deal with 
job displacement, and more. The optimal decisions will depend on the path the technology 
takes, and like any new field, most expert predictions have been wrong so far. This makes 
planning in a vacuum very difficult.”
●​ Similarly, Anthropic’s Core Views on Safety argues that safety is a reason to race to 
(or past) the capabilities frontier: 
“Unfortunately, if empirical safety research requires large models, that forces us to confront 
a difficult trade-off. We must make every effort to avoid a scenario in which 
safety-motivated research accelerates the deployment of dangerous technologies. But we 
also cannot let excessive caution make it so that the most safety-conscious research 
efforts only ever engage with systems that are far behind the frontier, thereby dramatically 
slowing down what we see as vital research. Furthermore, we think that in practice, doing 
safety research isn’t enough – it’s also important to build an organization with the 
institutional knowledge to integrate the latest safety research into real systems as quickly as 
possible.”
●​ Elon Musk has used this argument too, justifying his creation of xAI with the claim 
that the  only way to make AGI “good” was to be a participant:
“I’ve really struggled with this AGI thing for a long time and I’ve been somewhat resistant to 
making it happen,” he said. “But it really seems that at this point it looks like AGI is going to 
happen so there’s two choices, either be a spectator or a participant. As a spectator, one 
can’t do much to influence the outcome.”
Then, fear of the wrong people developing AGI, have been exploited as a further reason to 
race even faster:
●​ This is the gist of the “entente strategy” proposed by Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei 
and endorsed by many influential members of Effective Altruism, such as think tank 
 The Compendium | 91 

The AI Race
RAND, discussed above, as well as the language Sam Altman is increasingly using to 
stoke nation-state competition: 
“That is the urgent question of our time. The rapid progress being made on artificial 
intelligence means that we face a strategic choice about what kind of world we are going to 
live in: Will it be one in which the United States and allied nations advance a global AI that 
spreads the technology’s benefits and opens access to it, or an authoritarian one, in which 
nations or movements that don’t share our values use AI to cement and expand their power?”
●​ And in one of the most egregious cases, Leopold Aschenbrenner’s Situational 
Awareness, which captures much of the utopists’ view, argues that racing and 
abandoning safety is the only way to ensure that noble actors win, and can then take 
the time to proceed thoughtfully:
“Only if we preserve a healthy lead of democratic allies will we have the margin of error for 
navigating the extraordinarily volatile and dangerous period around the emergence of 
superintelligence. And only American leadership is a realistic path to developing a 
nonproliferation regime to avert the risks of self-destruction superintelligence will unfold.”
This has the same smell as Big Tobacco reinforcing the uncertainty of science as a way to 
sell products that kill people, and Big Tech stoking the fear of losing innovation as a way to 
ensure they can keep their monopolies and kill competition. These are not thoughtful 
arguments that examine the pros and cons and end up deciding to race; these are instead 
rationalizations of the desire and decision to race, playing on sacred notions like science 
and democracy to get what they want.
Capturing and neutralizing regulation and research
The AGI race has also seen systematic (and mostly successful) attempts to capture and 
neutralize the two forces that might slow down the race: AI regulation and AI safety 
research.
Capturing AI regulation
Utopists consistently undermine regulation attempts, emphasizing the risks of slowing or 
stopping AI development by appealing to geopolitical tensions or suggesting that the 
regulation is premature and will stifle innovation.
OpenAI, Google, and Anthropic all opposed core provisions of SB 1047, one of the few 
recent proposals that could have effectively regulated AI, emphasizing the alleged costs 
to competitiveness and that the industry is too nascent. OpenAI argued that this kind of 
legislation should happen at the federal level, not at the state level, and thus opposed the 
law because it might be unproductive:
 The Compendium | 92 

The AI Race
However, the broad and signiﬁcant implications of AI for U.S. competitiveness and national 
security require that regulation of frontier models be shaped and implemented at the 
federal level. A federally-driven set of AI policies, rather than a patchwork of state laws, will 
foster innovation and position the U.S. to lead the development of global standards. As a 
result, we join other AI labs, developers, experts and members of California’s Congressional 
delegation in respectfully opposing SB 1047.
Anthropic24 requested amendments to the bill that would remove any state enforcement of 
safety frameworks, and to instead let companies iterate by themselves:
What is needed in such a new environment is iteration and experimentation, not prescriptive 
enforcement. There is a substantial risk that the bill and state agencies will simply be wrong 
about what is actually effective in preventing catastrophic risk, leading to ineffective and/or 
burdensome compliance requirements.
These arguments seem credible and well-intentioned on their own — there are indeed 
geopolitical tensions, and we should design effective legislation.
However, considered in concert, this is another FUD tactic: instead of advocating for 
stronger, more effective and sensible legislation, or brokering international agreements to 
limit geopolitical tensions, the utopists suggest self-regulation that keeps them in control. 
Most have published frameworks for the evaluation of existential risks: Anthropic’s 
Responsible Scaling Policy, OpenAI’s Preparedness Framework, and DeepMind’s Frontier 
Safety Framework.
The details of each of these policies are irrelevant, because at no point do they attempt or 
focus on enforcement by governments. Even worse, the documents clearly state that the 
AGI companies can and will edit the conditions and constraints for future AIs, however they 
see fit.  Indeed, Anthropic hasn’t missed the chance of introducing a backdoor to racing 
even faster if they’re not in the lead anymore:
It is possible at some point in the future that another actor in the frontier AI ecosystem will 
pass, or be on track to imminently pass, a Capability Threshold without implementing 
measures equivalent to the Required Safeguards such that their actions pose a serious risk 
for the world. In such a scenario, because the incremental increase in risk attributable to us 
would be small, we might decide to lower the Required Safeguards. If we take this measure, 
however, we will also acknowledge the overall level of risk posed by AI systems (including 
24 Anthropic eventually ended up supporting the bill, with Dario Amodei writing a letter to Gov. 
Newsom that the "benefits outweighed the cost". 
But this was after previously joining lobbying groups against the regulation, requesting revisions, 
and waiting until the bill already had a high chance of veto. Whether genuine or a case intended to 
create plausible deniability is uncertain, but in concert with their other actions, suspicious.
 The Compendium | 93 

The AI Race
ours), and will invest significantly in making a case to the U.S. government for taking 
regulatory action to mitigate such risk to acceptable levels.
The utopists are exploiting fear of China and bad legislation to retain control over 
regulation, in turn devising proposals that let them modify boundaries as they approach 
them. To understand what type of regulation these companies really believe in, we can just 
track their actions: polite talk in public, while lobbying hard against regulation behind the 
scene, such as what OpenAI did for the EU AI Act.
Both Big Tech and accelerationists actors are supporting the utopists in their push against 
any kind of binding AI regulation. Indeed, Microsoft, who bankrolls OpenAI, and 
Andreessen-Horowitz, who position themselves as champions of little tech and 
open-source, recently co-authored a public post arguing:
As the new global competition in AI evolves, laws and regulations that mitigate AI harm 
should focus on the risk of bad actors misusing AI and aim to avoid creating new barriers to 
business formation, growth, and innovation.
As discussed in Section 5, the impacts of these ideological actors on the policy space have 
been widespread, and now, unenforced reactive frameworks have become the primary 
governance strategy endorsed by governments and AI governance actors. For those 
familiar with the past two decades of Big Tech’s anti-regulation approaches, this is nothing 
new.
Capturing safety research
The utopists have also found two ways to capture safety research: constraining “safety” 
and “alignment” work to research that can’t impede the race, and controlling the funding 
landscape.
OpenAI managed to redefine safety and alignment from “doesn’t endanger humanity” to 
“doesn’t produce anything racist or illegal.” The 2016 OpenAI Charter referenced AGI in its 
discussion of safety:
OpenAI’s mission is to ensure that artificial general intelligence (AGI)—by which we mean 
highly autonomous systems that outperform humans at most economically valuable 
work—benefits all of humanity. We will attempt to directly build safe and beneficial AGI, but 
will also consider our mission fulfilled if our work aids others to achieve this outcome.
The May 2024 OpenAI Safety Update strikes a different tone: 
Our models have become significantly safer over time. This can be attributed to building 
smarter models which typically make fewer factual errors and are less likely to output 
harmful content even under adversarial conditions like jailbreaks.
 The Compendium | 94 

The AI Race
Anthropic has similarly maneuvered to define safety as is convenient, focusing its 
alignment and safety research efforts on areas that do not actually limit racing but instead 
provide an edge. These include:
●​ Mechanistic interpretability, which tries to reverse-engineer AIs to understand how 
they work, which can then be used to advance and race even faster.
●​ Scalable oversight, which is another term for whack-a-mole approaches where the 
current issues are incrementally “fixed” by training them away. This incentivizes 
obscuring issues rather than resolving them. It also helps Anthropic build chatbots, 
providing a steady revenue stream.
●​ Evaluations, which test LLMs for dangerous capabilities. But Anthropic ultimately 
decides what is cause for slowdown, and their commitments are voluntary. 
These approaches lead to a strategy that aims to use superintelligent AI to solve the 
hardest problems of AI safety, which, naturally, is an argument that is then used to justify 
racing to build AGI. OpenAI, Deepmind, Anthropic, X.AI (“accelerating human scientific 
discovery”), and others have all proposed deferring and outsourcing questions of AI safety 
to more advanced AI systems.
These opinions have matriculated into the field of technical AI safety and now make up the 
majority of research efforts, largely because the entire funding landscape is controlled by 
utopists. 
Most AI safety researchers concerned with extinction risk work at AGI companies which are 
ironically one of the few places with the funding and interest to pay for safety research. This 
structure benefits AGI companies. By controlling which areas of research get attention, AGI 
companies have successfully shifted the field of AI safety towards a paradigm that 
implicitly endorses building powerful AI. 
Outside of AGI companies, the main source of funding has been the Effective Altruism 
community, which has pushed for the troubling entente strategy and endorsed 
self-regulation through its main founding organ, Open Philanthropy. 
In this situation, it is expected that none of the “AI safety” actors are really pushing against 
the race, nor paying the costs of alignment. 
 How will this go?.
Because utopists are driven to be the first to build AGI to control the future, they 
intentionally downplay the risks and neutralize any potential regulatory obstacles. Their 
behavior, and the secondary motions of Big Tech players and accelerationists, further 
accelerating the race: everybody is trying to get ahead.
 The Compendium | 95 

The AI Race
The race runs the risk of morphing from commercial to political as governments become 
increasingly convinced that AGI is a matter of national security and supremacy. 
Government intervention could override market forces and unlock significantly more 
funding, heightening geopolitical tensions. Political actors may be motivated to race out of 
fear that a competitor can deploy AGI that neutralizes all other parties.
This transition might already be in motion. The US government recently toyed with the idea 
of establishing national labs on AI:
The new approach won’t propose the “Manhattan Project for AI” that some have urged. But it 
should offer a platform for public-private partnerships and testing that could be likened to a 
national laboratory, a bit like Lawrence Livermore in Berkeley, Calif., or Los Alamos in New 
Mexico. For the National Security Council officials drafting the memo, the core idea is to 
drive AI-linked innovation across the U.S. economy and government, while also anticipating 
and preventing threats to public safety.
And then, the US government started collaborating with AGI companies to harness the 
power of AI for national security:
The National Security Memorandum (NSM) is designed to galvanize federal government 
adoption of AI to advance the national security mission, including by ensuring that such 
adoption reflects democratic values and protects human rights, civil rights, civil liberties and 
privacy. In addition, the NSM seeks to shape international norms around AI use to reflect 
those same democratic values, and directs actions to track and counter adversary 
development and use of AI for national security purposes.
This is yet another sign that the AI industry is gearing itself up to race even faster, not pivot 
toward safety.
 The Compendium | 96 

A good future, if you can keep it 
 (7) A good future, if you can keep it.25
We must find a way to avert extinction by AI and put humanity in full control of its 
technological development. This Compendium aims to be a tactical guide. Having 
mapped the historical trajectory and current landscape and challenges, we can now 
consider effective interventions. 
The prerequisite for any global solution is a shared understanding of the issues. We need to 
generate civic engagement, build informed community opposition to the AGI race, and 
make the catastrophic risks from AI common knowledge. Human extinction concerns all of 
us, and a solution must eventually compound into global governance that can build 
technology deliberately and justly.
If you’d like to participate, we’d love for you to join us.26 
In Civic duty is the foundation of a response to AGI risk, we challenge the idea that the 
extraordinary risks from AGI require extraordinary solutions. Instead, we propose that what 
is needed today is basic civic engagement from concerned individuals and a whole lot of 
mundane (but important) work. This is not easy, as the civics process around technology 
has been undermined by Big Tech.   
In Creating a vision and a plan for a good future, we encourage readers to think critically 
about the future they want and how to get there. We then outline our high-level vision for a 
technologically mature society and a “Just Process” for making civilization-wide decisions 
about risks like AGI.
In Actions that help reduce AGI risk, we propose a “bootstrapping” process to get involved 
immediately and learn the necessary skills to contribute. We then outline practical actions 
to improve AI safety communication, coordination, civics, and technical caution.
 Civic duty is the foundation of a response to AGI risk.
The race to AGI is not an isolated incident, but representative of a broader societal tension 
between rapid technical progress and our inability to coordinate effectively to manage its 
consequences. While technological advancements unlock immense potential, the last 20 
26 If you’d like to discuss what you can do more directly, please join us alongside nonprofit ControlAI 
here
25 The phrase "a republic, if you can keep it" is attributed to Benjamin Franklin and conveys the idea 
that the stability and success of a republic would depend heavily on the engagement of its citizens.
 The Compendium | 97 

A good future, if you can keep it 
years have exhibited major failures in our ability to direct these innovations toward the 
collective good and manage their externalities: we are witnessing environmental collapse, 
increased partisanship and devolvement of our information sources, mental health 
epidemics, and trillion dollar companies that profit off of stealing human attention. 
Today’s landscape is a product of Big Tech’s coup; technology was built faster than 
governments could regulate, agitated by a doctrine of fear (“if you regulate us, the 
economy will die”), uncertainty (“we can’t regulate this tech now because the future is 
uncertain”), and doubt (“governments are too unfamiliar with the tech to make prudent 
decisions on how to regulate”). Big Tech attacked both regulatory legislation and the 
legislative process itself, building a public ideology that the law is intrinsically bad and that 
governments and public institutions are intrinsically bad, all while embedding lobbyists and 
allies into governments to capture power and become vital to intelligence, defense, and 
other public projects.
This coup has led people to believe that issues with technology are someone else’s 
problem – governments, NGOs, the UN, whomever – and that individuals are powerless to 
intervene on new technical questions. 
The sense of powerlessness has spilled over to AI: key decisions are made by a handful of 
AGI companies that have partnered up with Big Tech and captured technical safety and 
governance efforts. AI progress is moving so fast that newcomers have a hard time making 
sense of the race. And the actions that are necessary to get to a good future – such as 
building more stable global governance – appear far out of reach of ordinary people. 
Assessing all of these, concerned individuals may feel like it is hopeless to contribute. 
It is a mistake to read the situation as hopeless, and plays into the hand of the actors driving 
the race. 
Although we are in an emergency, the work to stop AGI today is not hardcore, but an 
exercise of our basic civic duty. 
 
Public concern for climate change was activated by the collective efforts of a handful of 
informed citizens who cared, took the time to get informed, and slowly chipped away at 
Big Oil’s ability to obfuscate the problem. We can learn from that playbook to mitigate AGI 
risk by educating the public and encouraging simple actions like talking to friends about 
the issues, writing on social media, and contacting local representatives. As public 
perception of the risks strengthens, it will catalyze other interventions like creating AI 
Safety Institutes, public statements, international dialogues, protests, tracking integrity 
 The Compendium | 98 

A good future, if you can keep it 
incidents of labs, formalizing boundaries for AI behavior, upskilling programs on AI risk, 
educational videos, and more. 
Most people will not and cannot dedicate their lives to working against the threat of AGI or 
similarly grand problems, and this is good. The world we care to protect is not the world in 
which everyone is single-mindedly tackling humanity’s immediate priority; it is one in which 
people enjoy their lives as civilians, not soldiers. 
But proactive involvement from more people is necessary. While “civics” isn’t the entire 
answer to the problem, it is the foundation. We humans have gotten ourselves into this 
predicament, and now it’s on us to do the work to get out.  
 Creating a vision and a plan for a good future. 
The first step to shaping the future is defining a plan for dealing with the risks of AGI  and 
getting to the kind of future we want to live in.
There are no adults in the room writing this plan for us. Consider today’s most sophisticated 
AI legislation, the EU AI Act. Although it acknowledges “systemic risk,” it does little to 
manage it. AGI companies are only required to evaluate the capabilities of their models, 
report training information, and ensure a baseline level of cybersecurity. This does not give 
humanity a roadmap to a good future.
A more comprehensive proposal is offered by A Narrow Path, which assumes a worldview 
similar to our own and investigates how to prevent superintelligence development for 20 
years. They consider how to prohibit each of the risk vectors that could lead to 
superintelligence, such as AIs improving AIs, AIs capable of breaking out of their 
environment, unbounded AIs, and AIs with vast general intelligence. They then consider 
what is necessary to enforce that, such as strong regulation, physical kill-switches, and 
national regulators to monitor AI usage. They then turn to balancing the international 
situation, proposing an international treaty with a judicial arm and new international 
institutions as a way to get to stable global governance capable of preventing rogue actors 
from building superintelligence.
We endorse A Narrow Path’s proposal in full, and recommend that you read it. 
However, it is most valuable to write your own plan first. We mean this literally: open a new 
document, name your goal, and bullet point the actions necessary to get there. 
 The Compendium | 99 

A good future, if you can keep it 
Your plan does not need to be comprehensive or perfect, but the exercise prompts you to 
make your current point of view explicit and reckon with the challenges ahead. Considering 
even the crudest strategies to avoid AI risk (e.g. “turn off all datacenters!”) immediately 
raises thorny issues: how is this going to be implemented? Is it really sufficient? What if 
there are bad actors?
A good plan:​
 
●​ Articulates a vision for the future you actually want to live in.​
 
●​ Adequately grapples with the risks from superintelligence. A Narrow Path is a 
comprehensive plan to do this, but it is not the only way. As you develop your own 
strategy, you will likely find other (or better!) ways to control AI.​
 
●​ Defines actionable steps. This is where individual plans diverge — only you can 
author next steps. A Narrow Path isn’t actionable; a lawmaker could read it and 
decide to pursue  oversight and meaningful legislation, but they would still need to 
write bills themselves, push them through their jurisdictions, ensure they’re not 
vetoed at the last minute, and so on. Your plan must define a specific list of actions 
to take and a way to evaluate roadblocks. You are the expert on your local situation, 
and civic engagement is built from local engagement.​
To develop your plan, talk with friends, engage in public discourse,  read and consider 
alternative perspectives, and generally keep working to refine your worldview. But these 
are all things you can do over time, and they don’t need to block you from writing a first 
plan.
If you’ve envisioned the future you want and written an initial plan, you’ve made it further 
than almost anyone else in the world on this subject and are ready to take action. 
The authors’ plan
We the authors – Connor, Gabe, Chris, Andrea, Adam – make plans the same way. What we 
share below is a loose sketch of our plan and how we decide which actions to take.
Each of us have different values and visions, and we do not claim to know what is best for 
humanity, or what is the right future. But we agree that we should not aim for a specific 
utopia, but rather a “Just Process,” that aims to determine what the right future is, and 
enables humanity to work together to reach it.
 The Compendium | 100 

A good future, if you can keep it 
Today, humanity can build technology powerful enough to end civilization, yet we lack the 
ability to collectively steer this progress in a safe direction. The extinction risk posed by AGI 
is the ultimate expression of this imbalance. Despite widespread acknowledgment of the 
dangers, no single person or institution possesses the capabilities, authority, and clarity to 
prevent these developments. And yet, individuals with visions of utopia can expose 
everyone else on the planet to monumental risk by racing toward AGI. 
We do not claim to know what is just, but we are confident that the current state of affairs is 
unjust. We want to escape this out-of-control development and build a Just Process that 
enables humanity to consciously choose its fate. 
We work backwards from this loose vision of a future to arrive at a plan.​
●​ We can’t get to a Just Process without a global solution.​
●​ We can’t get to a global solution without improvements in coordination, science, 
and moral philosophy; many of the hard problems of alignment are the same 
problems humans need to solve to figure out how together.​
 
●​ These challenges will take many years to solve, time which we do not have due to the 
race to AGI and the risk of extinction. ​
●​ We must therefore buy time, slowing or stopping AGI development as soon as 
possible.
●​ The only way to do so is through governance, and we endorse the proposal offered 
by A Narrow Path. 
●​ Building institutions that can regulate AI globally comes with challenges: 
nation-state competition threatens global cooperation, AGI companies are now 
fueling geopolitical arms races, Big Tech lobbying has made it extremely difficult to 
pass tech regulation and captured governance efforts. Coordinating most of the 
existing AI safety actors is futile as their underlying motivation endorse racing to 
AGI.27 
This brings us to the current bottlenecks, namely the lack of public consensus around the 
risks from AGI, the lack of an AI safety ecosystem free from AGI companies’ influence, and 
the lack of coordination among current actors concerned with halting the race to AGI. This 
was the motivation for writing this document: an attempt to articulate a worldview around 
27 See "entente" in Section 5
 The Compendium | 101 

A good future, if you can keep it 
the risks from AGI clearly enough that we can start to build coordination among those who 
see the situation similarly. 
This is an example of how to connect a high level vision to a broad plan, and then to specific 
actions. 
 Actions to help reduce AGI risk.
Helpful actions to reduce AGI risk derive from a good plan. If you’ve written your first plan, 
you’ve got all you need to start. Your plan may not be good to begin with, but taking action, 
reflecting, and iterating on your plan is the best way to improve it. 
Artificial intelligence is a technical subject, and some existing guides on getting involved in 
AI safety recommend learning more about the technology, taking AI safety courses, or 
planning for a career in technical AI safety or governance. These approaches are fine if you 
have the interest and ability to pursue these, but they are not necessary.  
●​ Write things down. What isn’t written down doesn’t exist. Your mind is fallible and 
forgetful, put as much of it in writing as possible so you can rely on and iterate on it 
later. 
●​ Think about what you do. Your mind is your most important tool. To strengthen it, 
you need to think about it, about your motivations, what you’ve learned, what your 
next plans are, etc. 
●​ Keep things grounded, including, and especially, for intellectual labor. It’s difficult 
to detect progress without getting feedback from reality. The best way to practice 
is usually to do.
●​ Keep reasonable habits. Spend time with your friends and family, eat healthy, get 
enough sleep, touch grass. When faced with enormous challenges, it can be 
tempting to sacrifice everything in your life to struggle against them. This is 
unproductive and self-destructive. It’s a marathon, not a race. Keep that day job. It’s 
much better to work with someone who gives their all 10% of the time than with 
someone who gives their all 110% of the time and then burns out. If thinking about 
the risks becomes overwhelming, consider reading about mental health and AI 
alignment, talking to a professional, and taking a break.
To make consistent and useful progress, on both our projects and ourselves, we must be 
capable of contributing reliably and independently. 
So let’s dive in: how can you make your plan to reduce risk from AGI actionable, particularly 
if the goals are so grand as to demand solutions humanity has not yet come up with? Below, 
we argue that communication, coordination, civics, and technical caution are necessary to 
 The Compendium | 102 

A good future, if you can keep it 
reach a broader solution, and suggest shovel-ready work you could do to help address 
today’s bottlenecks.
Communication
One of the simplest things you can do to contribute is to communicate publicly about the 
risks of AGI. From posting on social media to writing in a local newspaper, thoughtful 
opinions that add to common knowledge of the risks is helpful.
Common knowledge establishes a basis for working together to solve problems. Before 
collaborating, people must agree on what the problem is. To solve the risks from AGI, 
society must agree on what the problem is and that the risks are real, imminent, and time 
sensitive. 
Certain problems can only be solved when there is known consensus. Consider a town 
election where three candidates are running for office. Alice and Bob are well-known 
candidates, but are both terrible choices for office, and Charlie is a newcomer and is 
excellent. Individually, everyone in town wants Charlie to win, but they don’t know that 
everyone else feels the same way and worry that their vote would be wasted. In this 
hypothetical, the entire town may want Charlie to win the election, but he may not be voted 
in because there is a lack of common knowledge. Public statements will help Charlie win: 
more people need to declare their support  so that everyone knows that there is a 
consensus and that their vote for Charlie would be meaningful.
 
Common knowledge is the way that a group changes its mind. Without common 
knowledge of AGI risks, collective concern could still result in inaction because the subject 
is considered unpopular. And indeed, this partially explains the current landscape: the race 
to AGI continues in full force, even though polling suggests that people overwhelmingly 
“worry about risks from AI, favor regulations, and don’t trust companies to police 
themselves.” We need to convince humanity to collaborate on this problem. 
Humanity can solve a great number of issues, but only the ones that it is paying attention to. 
Communication also drives saliency, making ideas noticeable and prominent.
On an individual level, most people do not think about most things. There are simply too 
many things to pay attention to, and it can be hard to decide which of the many critical 
issues of geopolitical importance deserve attention over the very real and tangible 
challenges in one's own personal life. Without reminders and exposure, especially from 
peers, it’s easy to ignore an issue.
 The Compendium | 103 

A good future, if you can keep it 
Saliency is a scarce resource. This is why advertising works, and also why it is harmful: it pulls 
individual and group attention away from prosocial ideas and toward meaningless ideas. 
And this is why the communications and lobbying strategy of Big Tech is to distract and 
delay. Scattering attention away or dragging out a legal case reduces saliency as people’s 
attention wanes, and makes it harder for meaningful intervention to come together.
The type of communication that is needed today is the type that cuts through distraction, 
and makes the risks of AGI clear, common knowledge and salient. This is necessary to 
convince humanity to do something. 
— 
The core message to communicate is that racing to AGI is unethical and dangerous, and 
that the actors doing this are harmful to society. Humanity’s default response to risks of 
this magnitude should be caution. Today, the position is to allow private companies to 
keep racing until there is a problem, which is untenable as allowing private companies to 
build nuclear reactors until one melts down.
 
This message needs to go hand in hand with mature discussion about the real risks of AGI 
and superintelligence. Because actors like AGI companies and Big Tech have strong 
incentive to build AGI, public communications are a narrative battle. These actors will 
continue to use a playbook that downplays or obscures the risks and makes their 
inventions seem societally progressive and harmless, while lobbying against any regulation 
that slows them down. Challenging these tactics requires understanding this strategy, and 
ensuring companies racing to AGI have their feet held to the fire.
Communications help raise common knowledge and improve the quality of the debate. 
Here are some actions you could take today:
●​ Share a link to this Compendium online or with friends, and provide your feedback 
on which ideas are correct and which are unconvincing. This is a living document, 
and your suggestions will shape our arguments.
●​ Post your views on AGI risk to social media, explaining why you believe it to be a 
legitimate problem (or not).
●​ Red-team companies’ plans to deal with AI risk, and call them out publicly if they do 
not have a legible plan. 
●​ Find and follow 20 social media accounts that discuss risks from AGI. Regularly 
engage with this content, sharing and debating it.
●​ Push back against the race to AGI when you hear people advocate for it, engaging in 
productive debate and avoiding ad hominem.
 The Compendium | 104 

A good future, if you can keep it 
●​ Produce content based on AGI risk, like a video, meme, short story, game, or art. If 
you do this more routinely, consider how your audience engages with the content 
and work to increase the quality of understanding viewers have over time.
●​ Write an opinion piece for a local newspaper, or an op-ed for a larger publication. 
Highlight the battle lines of argumentation – where do the risks seem genuine, and 
which ideas demand more debate?
●​ Create websites that discuss the risks or help collect important information about 
the race to AGI, such as websites that:
○​ Quote what leaders of AGI companies have said about the risks of AGI.
○​ Quote what politicians have said about the risks of AGI.
○​ Detail which AI capabilities currently exist and how fast they are developing. 
Visualizations and charts or explanations that can be shared and built upon by 
others are especially useful.
○​ Explain the history of the race to AGI.
○​ Track lobbying efforts of Big Tech and which issues they are paying attention 
to.
○​ Offer basic explanations of the risks of AGI to different audiences, such as 
artists, youth, religious groups, and so on. 
○​ Collect public opinions on AI, or offer platforms for individuals to voice their 
concerns.
●​ Talk to your friends about AGI risks, and write down what they say. Track 
argumentation and aim to improve the quality of your thinking and theirs on the 
subject. 
●​ Organize a local learning group or event, like a discussion or town hall, to bring 
people together to talk about the risks and what can be done. 
Communications compound. Common knowledge is built with small, consistent 
communications. Consider deliberately scheduling in weekly time to learn and share about 
AI risks. 
There are, of course, wider actions that can be taken here. If you have the resources and 
skills, 
you 
could create campaigning organizations that spread awareness of 
superintelligence risks, or start strategic communications organizations that draw 
attention to AI risks around particular key events, such as AI summits or key legislation 
developments. For those with these kinds of affordances who are interested in helping, 
please reach out to us. 
 The Compendium | 105 

A good future, if you can keep it 
Coordination
Communication about the risks from racing to AGI is an essential first step for improving the 
situation, but it is insufficient. Even if most people agree that there is a problem and much 
should be done, working individually will not get us to a global solution.
Group coordination is necessary to succeed, but it is non-trivial. There are many ways this 
has already failed around AI safety. The most extreme historical cases involve cult 
dynamics, and becoming the type of community that accidentally kick-started the race to 
AGI (see Section 6 on how early Singularitarians led to the formation of DeepMind, OpenAI, 
and Anthropic). 
We need strong community builders and communities. These communities cannot make 
excuses for actors racing to AGI just because they are friends, as is the case with existing AI 
safety communities. They must instead stay laser-focused on ending the race to AGI, 
providing a written plan for a safe future, ideally a public one that can be improved over 
time.
And most importantly, these communities must become mainstream. Human extinction 
concerns all of us, and any issue of that scale requires involving many, many people. These 
groups must communicate in a way that is legible to people who do not share their very 
specific cultural background and teach the relevant technical concepts to a wide audience 
in a non-jargony way. They must engage with political parties, civil society, and other 
institutions. 
If one economist learns about a method that will stop an impending financial crisis, she 
can’t immediately stop the economy from crashing. There are many, many steps necessary 
to move between her idea and a wider solution: she must convince members of 
government with the authority to control financial matters; they must run calculations to 
assess if the method is accurate; a bill may need to be written and passed as new 
legislation; the treasury may need to print money; financial institutions may need to change 
their policies, and so on.
There is no silver bullet. We need communities to try many different strategies. And these 
communities must be ready to not just talk about the issues, but also engage with 
institutions and improve them until they are competent enough to deal with the risks.
We do not believe there is any such community, with the perspective and resources to help. 
We have not built it yet, partially for lack of focus (we are writing the Compendium and 
working on technical projects), and partially for lack of still: we have tried small attempts at 
community building on the side and been unsuccessful. We have a small effort alongside 
 The Compendium | 106 

A good future, if you can keep it 
ControlAI that you are welcome to join and participate in, but the kind of global community 
that is needed is much stronger and better established than these local efforts.
What is needed until a global community exists is to lay the foundation for one to arise. Start 
small, find like-minded and concerned collaborators,work alongside them, and find 
reliable ways to keep collaborating:
●​ Discuss the risks with concerned or open-minded friends and family members. 
Suggest that they also write actionable plans for how to get involved, and regularly 
get together to make progress on these plans. This is the most local community you 
could form, and getting experience working alongside others on the problem is 
critical.
●​ Share what you are working on publicly, including how you work and how others can 
work with you. 
●​ Learn about the groups working on AI safety and get involved. Join online 
communities and Discord groups that take the risks from AGI seriously, such as 
ControlAI or PauseAI, and get involved with their activity and improve their projects.
●​ Compare strategies between individuals and groups you’re in contact with and see 
if there are shared projects that make sense to pursue. 
●​ Connect existing groups or organizations working on reducing the risks from AGI. 
Create group chats or other communications channels, and work on finding 
projects that make sense to pursue across multiple organizations (e.g. a 
communications plan that shares common messaging). 
●​ Participate in events about AI extinction risks such as local discussion groups, AI 
summits, and so on. 
●​ Take part in upskilling programs where you can meet people who care about these 
risks
●​ Come up with concrete projects that could form the basis of collaboration with 
others.
These are proto-community-building efforts, designed to get more people involved in 
direct contributions to stopping the race to AGI. 
If you have the resources to get much more involved, such as a position of authority or a 
company with resources, then explore operating at a higher scale. Consider how to get 
others involved, which groups you believe are working on the problem well and how to work 
alongside them, and if you or your organization have the capacity to play a leadership role in 
community building, which is sorely lacking today. Or consider larger coordination projects 
outside of AI, which improve the global commons and make working on issues like this 
easier. 
 The Compendium | 107 

A good future, if you can keep it 
Over time, these efforts must add up to build an AI safety ecosystem away from AGI 
companies and the groups they have captured, coordinating between non-profits, 
startups, funders, regulators, academics, governments, and concerned individuals who are 
opposed to the AGI race and take extinction risks seriously.
Civics
Civics is about taking responsibility for things that are larger than you, and acting on them. 
It is looking at civilizational coordination problems like how we will respond to climate 
change or AGI, and raising your hand to be a part of this. 
If you live in a democracy, you have a voice and the ability to influence key local decisions. 
This means not only voting based on what your local politicians want to do on AI risks, but 
also messaging them and your fellow citizens.
Participation is necessary for democracy’s function. Democracies contain many different 
processes intended to give power and sovereignty to the citizens, but these only work if 
the citizens actually exercise them. The less citizens make their voice heard, participate, ask 
for things and unite around core issues, the less oversight there is on the elected officials. 
This lack of pressure makes lobbying and political manipulation so potent: if politicians do 
not face pressure from citizens, they can keep their office while disregarding risks that 
people care about.
Some more concrete examples of civic actions include:
●​ Figure out where your local government (council/city/state) stands with regard to AI 
extinction risk. Who cares about it there? Who doesn’t care about it? Is it because 
they understand and disagree or because they don’t understand? 
●​ Publicize what your local government thinks and proposes to do with regard to AI 
extinction risk. This way, others do not need to repeat your efforts and can learn 
directly from your investigation. For example, if others want to vote based on who 
takes AI risks seriously, having the information accessible on a website would make 
it much easier for them to judge candidates.
●​ Educate your local government and fellow citizens about AI extinction risk by writing 
to politicians, calling them, bringing up the topic at local events, sharing education 
materials about AI risks, and engaging others to talk about the issue. These deeper, 
in-person conversations often help people change their mind, by demonstrating 
not just that arguments for the risks exist, but that you – a real human in front of them 
right now – cares about the topic.
 The Compendium | 108 

A good future, if you can keep it 
●​ Vote according to the position on AI extinction risk of the candidates. Although this 
doesn’t have to be the only factor in the vote, taking this seriously and indeed voting 
is the simplest and yet most important part of civics.
These actions may look most useful in constituencies that have a large sway in the race to 
AGI, such as California where SB 1047 was proposed. But local action is meaningful 
everywhere. Good policies in one jurisdiction can serve as precedent for another, and 
raising awareness with elected officials and civil servants trickles up and grows the 
common knowledge and saliency of AI risks to government in general. This is necessary to 
motivate any coalition to push for meaningful regulation. 
If you have more influence, such as working in government, then consider the 
recommendations in A Narrow Path and if there is anything recommended there that could 
apply to your jurisdiction. At a minimum, additional statements about the risks from elected 
officials matter greatly. If you’d like to do even more, please reach out. We would be happy 
to discuss what can be done in your local context. 
Technical Caution
Communication, coordination, and civics are the current bottlenecks to larger solutions to 
AGI risk. There will be more obstacles in the future, but solving them will require making 
meaningful traction on these foundational issues.
To avoid worsening the problem, we must redirect technical development. As the race to 
AGI continues, it is developers of the technology, both at AGI companies and in the 
open-source community and academia, who are increasing the risks.
It is not that any single developer or released research paper is entirely responsible, but the 
overall wave of research and development is what will lead to AGI, superintelligence, and 
eventually extinction. Each open-source project that advances AGI-like capabilities, 
research paper that offers AI optimizations, and product that improves the general 
capabilities of AI chips away at the time we have left until AGI. What is especially dangerous 
is not just working on capabilities, but working on and sharing capabilities publicly. 
If you are participating in this kind of research, you should stop. In particular, not 
compounding AGI risk means that you should:
●​ Not work for companies participating in the AGI race.
●​ Not share (or even draw attention to) AGI-advancing research or secrets, such as 
methods to improve agency, optimizations, self-improvement techniques, and so 
on. This includes: 
 The Compendium | 109 

A good future, if you can keep it 
○​ Publishing papers
○​ Releasing open-source projects
○​ Writing blog posts
○​ Discussing with other technical researchers,
○​ and similar.
●​ Challenge friends, colleagues, and other technical developers who are accelerating 
the AGI race by working at AGI companies or releasing AGI-enabling research.
Stopping is expensive. If you do not publish your research, you will get less academic 
credit, less VC money, less recruiting opportunities, and so on. But compromises are a deal 
with the devil; if you loosen your standards of publication, you will actually get more power: 
more people will like you, prospects of being hired will go up, and so on. If you are 
Anthropic and you push capabilities towards AGI by releasing agentic AI that can use a 
computer, you will get a lot of useful clout and money. Over time, these concessions add 
up to the entirety of the issue. 
If you genuinely care about the risk, you should pay the cost and actually stick to this 
rule: do not release AGI capabilities research or products. If everyone abided by this rule, 
we’d be in a safe world.
This is not to say that you should completely stop working on AI, or stop using AI to make 
money as long as you do so ethically. There are hundreds of AI-enabled projects that will 
improve  the world, like improving healthcare and automating menial labor, which do not 
require pushing the boundaries of AI closer to risk. AI projects that try to solve a narrow 
problem in order to improve people’s lives are much less likely to lead to AGI. 
Note: We have conveyed throughout this document that AI safety entails challenging 
research and technical problems, from solving AI alignment to building technical measures 
to bound the capabilities of AI. Unfortunately, this is a very large subject out of scope for 
this document. If you are passionate about this and want to contribute to a technical 
solution, send us an email. 
 The Compendium | 110 

Outro
 (8) Outro.
Does this all add up to a good future? Will this work? Are we going to be ok?
The truth is that we don’t know. 
But we do know that if we don’t do it, it won’t happen.
At the end of the day, we are a bunch of chimps with brains three times too big, trying our 
best to make it through the day, to the next generation, and eventually to the stars. 
The odds were always stacked against us — we are the species that shouldn’t be. Millions 
and billions of years and there never was a species like humans. No other species makes up 
for their soft skin and lack of claws like humans do. No other species makes art, culture and 
science like we do.
Following the Toba volcanic catastrophe, humanity was reduced to as few as 3000-10000 
individuals. And yet, somehow, we made it through. Humanity has made it through 
predation, epidemics, natural catastrophes, and ice ages. Today we ourselves are our 
greatest threat. 
The survival of that strange chimp was never guaranteed, and neither is it today. The century 
ahead of us is a challenge that strange chimps like us were never designed to face. And so, 
once more, we need to do the impossible, what no other species has done before:
We need to work together. As a tribe, a civilization, a species, for those strange chimps that 
came before us, and for those hopefully still to come.
We can build a good future, but we cannot do it alone. Humanity is the social animal — we 
do great things, and even greater things together.
If we don’t do it, it won’t happen. So let’s do it.
-​
Connor Leahy, October 2024
 The Compendium | 111 

The Compendium
By Connor Leahy, Gabriel Alfour, Chris Scammell, Andrea Miotti, Adam Shimi
V1.3.1 - Dec 9, 2024
Contact: hello@thecompendium.ai
Website: thecompendium.ai
