AI & SOCIETY (2020) 35:367–379
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-019-00887-x

OPEN FORUM

The race for an artificial general intelligence: implications for public
policy
Wim Naudé1,2 · Nicola Dimitri3
Received: 1 November 2018 / Accepted: 23 March 2019 / Published online: 22 April 2019
© The Author(s) 2019

Abstract
An arms race for an artificial general intelligence (AGI) would be detrimental for and even pose an existential threat to humanity if it results in an unfriendly AGI. In this paper, an all-pay contest model is developed to derive implications for public policy
to avoid such an outcome. It is established that, in a winner-takes-all race, where players must invest in R&D, only the most
competitive teams will participate. Thus, given the difficulty of AGI, the number of competing teams is unlikely ever to be
very large. It is also established that the intention of teams competing in an AGI race, as well as the possibility of an intermediate outcome (prize), is important. The possibility of an intermediate prize will raise the probability of finding the dominant
AGI application and, hence, will make public control more urgent. It is recommended that the danger of an unfriendly AGI
can be reduced by taxing AI and using public procurement. This would reduce the pay-off of contestants, raise the amount
of R&D needed to compete, and coordinate and incentivize co-operation. This will help to alleviate the control and political
problems in AI. Future research is needed to elaborate the design of systems of public procurement of AI innovation and for
appropriately adjusting the legal frameworks underpinning high-tech innovation, in particular dealing with patenting by AI.
Keywords Artificial intelligence · Innovation · Technology · Public policy
JEL classifications O33 · O38 · O14 · O15 · H57

1 Introduction
According to Sundar Pichai, CEO of Google 1, Artificial
Intelligence (AI) is probably the most important thing
humanity which has ever worked on… more profound than
electricity or fire. AI is expected to be one of the most
disruptive new emerging technologies (Van de Gevel and
Noussair 2013). Virtual digital assistants such as Amazon’s
Echo and Alexa, Apple’s Siri, and Microsoft’s Cortana have
become household names by making online shopping easier;

* Wim Naudé
w.naude@maastrichtuniversity.nl
Nicola Dimitri
dimitri@unisi.it
1

School of Business and Economics, Maastricht University
and MSM, Maastricht, The Netherlands

2

Visiting Professor, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen,
Germany

3

Department of Economics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy

automated vehicles from Tesla and Uber are excitedly anticipated to alleviate transport congestion and accidents; Googles Google Duplex outraged commentators with its ability
make telephone calls in a human voice. More generally, AI
is increasingly being used to optimize energy use in family homes, improve diagnoses of illness, help design new
medications, and assist in surgery, amongst others (Makridakis 2017). In short, AI is resulting in things getting ‘easier,
cheaper, and abundant’ (Cukier 2018, p. 165).
AI refers to ‘machines that act intelligently … when a
machine can make the right decision in uncertain circumstances; it can be said to be intelligent’ (New Scientist 2017, p. 3). A distinction needs to be made between
‘narrow’ (or ‘weak’) AI and Artificial General Intelligence
(AGI) (‘strong’ AI). Narrow AI is an AI that makes use
of algorithms to exploit large volumes of data to make

1

See: https​://www.wefor​um.org/agend​a/2018/01/googl​e-ceo-ai-willbe-bigge​r-than-elect​ricit​y-or-fire.
Vol.:(0123456789)
1
3

368

predictions, using ‘deep learning’2 to learn more from data
about a specific domain (LeCun et al. 2015). Narrow AI is,
therefore, domain-specific, excellent at specific tasks such as
playing chess or recommending a product; its ‘intelligence’,
however, cannot transfer to another domain. In contrast, AGI
refers to a true intelligence that would be indistinguishable
from human intelligence and that can be applied to all problem solving, and that would present a new general-purpose
technology (Trajtenberg 2018).
AGI does not exist at the time of writing this paper. All
aforementioned examples of AI are narrow AI applications.
Whilst impressive it remains the case that these are mindless
algorithms, with ‘the intelligence of an abacus: that is, zero’
(Floridi 2018, p. 157). They pose in this form no existential
threat to humans (Bentley 2018). Although an AGI with general capabilities that are comparable to human intelligence
does not yet exist, it remains an enticing goal.
Many scientists have predicted that with advances in computing power, data science, cognitive neuroscience, and bioengineering continuing at an exponential rate (often citing
Moore’s Law) that a ‘Singularity’ point will be reached in
the not-too-distant future, at which time AGI will exceed
human-level intelligence (Kurzweil 2005). It may result in
an ‘intelligence explosion’ (Chalmers 2010) heralding a
‘human-machine civilization’ (Van de Gevel and Noussair
2013, p. 2). At this point ‘economic growth will accelerate
sharply as an ever-increasing pace of improvements cascade
through the economy’ (Nordhaus 2015, p. 2). The year 2045
has been identified as a likely date for the singularity (Kurzweil 2005; Brynjolfsson et al. 2017; AI Impacts 2015).
Whichever high-tech firm or government lab succeed in
inventing the first AGI will obtain a potentially world-dominating technology. The gap in welfare between countries
where an AGI reside and where a ‘Singularity’ is achieved,
and other, a lagging countries, could grow exponentially.
Moreover, if the countries with the first access to an AGI
technology progress with such leaps and bounds that their
citizens ‘extend their lifespans tenfold‘ and even start to
merge with robots, then one could see an entire new class
of specially privileged humans appear (Van de Gevel and
Noussair 2013).
This potential winner-takes-all prize that the invention
of a true AGI raises the spectre of a competitive race for an

2
‘Deep-learning methods are representation-learning methods with
multiple levels of representation, obtained by composing simple but
non-linear modules that each transform the representation at one level
(starting with the raw input) into a representation at a higher, slightly
more abstract level higher layers of representation amplify aspects of
the input that are important for discrimination and suppress irrelevant
variations’ (LeCun et al. 2015, p. 436).

13

AI & SOCIETY (2020) 35:367–379

AGI.3 The incentives for high-tech firms to engage in a race
are twofold. One, as discussed above, is that the first-mover
advantage and likely winner-takes-all effect for a firm that
invents the first truly AGI (Armstrong et al. 2016). Second,
given that two-thirds of GDP in advanced economies are
paid to labor, any AI that would make labor much more
productive would have a substantial economic return (Van de
Gevel and Noussair 2013; PwC 2017). In addition to these
monetary incentives, a further motivating factor to race to
invent an AGI is due to the beliefs, often religious-like, that
more and more people have in technology as saviour of
humanity. See the discussion in Evans (2017) and Harari
(2011, 2016).4
The problem with a race for an AGI is that it may result in
a poor-quality AGI that does not take the welfare of humanity into consideration (Bostrom 2017). This is because the
competing firms in the arms race may cut corners and compromise on the safety standards in AGI (Armstrong et al.
2016). This could result in an ‘AI disaster’ where an AGI
wipe out all humans, either intentionally or neglectfully, or
may be misused by some humans against others, or benefit
only a small subset of humanity (AI Impacts 2016). Chalmers (2010) raises the spectre of a ‘Singularity bomb’ which
would be an AI designed to destroy the planet. As Stephan
Hawking has warned, AGI could be the ‘worst mistake in
history’ (Ford 2016, p. 225).
To avoid the ‘worst mistake in history’, it is necessary to
understand the nature of an AGI race, and how to avoid that
it leads to unfriendly AGI. In this light, the present paper
develops an all-pay contest model of an AGI race and to
establish the following results. First, in a winner-takes-all
race, where players must invest in R&D, only the most competitive teams will participate. Thus, given the difficulty of
AGI, the number of competing teams is unlikely ever to be
very large. This reduces the control problem. Second, the
intention of teams competing in an AGI race as well as the
possibility of an intermediate outcome (prize) is important.
The possibility of an intermediate prize will improve the
probability that an AGI will be created and, hence, make
public control even more urgent. The key policy recommendations are to tax AI and use public procurement. These
measures would reduce the pay-off of contestants, raise the
3

For the sake of clarity: with the words ‘AGI race’ in this paper is
meant a competition or contest between various teams (firms, government labs, and inventors) to invent the first AGI. It does not refer to a
convention ‘arms’ race where opposing forces accelerate the development of new sophisticated weapons systems that may utilize AI,
although there is of course concern that the AGI that may emerge
from a race will be utilized in actual arms races to perfect what is
known as Lethal Autonomous Weapons (LAW) [see Roff (2014)].
4
As Evans (2017, p. 221) point out ‘Kurzweil’s vision for the Singularity is reminiscent of the early twenty-century Christian mystic Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, who imagined the material universe
becoming progressively more animated by spiritual ecstasy’.

AI & SOCIETY (2020) 35:367–379

amount of R&D needed to compete, and coordinate and
incentivize co-operation.
The novel contribution of this paper is to build on the
pioneering paper of Armstrong et al. (2016), and provide a
rigorous and strategic analysis, from an economics perspective, on how government policies can influence the nature
of AI. Armstrong et al. (2016) established that the likelihood of avoiding an AI disaster and getting a ‘friendlier’
AGI depends crucially on reducing the number of competing
teams. They also established that, with better AI development capabilities, research teams will be less inclined to take
risks in compromising on safety and alignment. The unanswered questions in the Armstrong et al. (2016) model are,
however, precisely how government can steer the number
of competing teams? How can government policy reduce
competition in the race for an AGI and raise the importance
of capability? Should AI be taxed and/or nationalized? In
this paper, the contribution is to answer these questions and
show that the danger of an unfriendly AGI can indeed, in
principle, be reduced by taxing AI and using public procurement. This would reduce the pay-off of contestants, raise
the amount of R&D needed to compete, and coordinate and
incentivize co-operation. All of these effects will help to
alleviate the control and political problems in AI.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides
an overview of the current literature and underscores the
importance of development of a friendly AI and the fundamental challenges in this respect, consisting of a control (or
alignment) problem and a political problem. In Sect. 3 an
all-pay contest model of an AGI race is developed wherein
the key mechanisms and public policy instruments to reduce
an unfavorable outcome are identified. Section 4 discusses
various policy implications. Section 5 concludes with a summary and recommendations.

2 Related literature
An AGI does not yet exist, although it has been claimed
that, by the year 2045, AGI will be strong enough to trigger a ‘Singularity’ (Brynjolfsson et al. 2017). These claims
are based on substantial current activity in AI, reflected
amongst others in rising R&D expenditure and patenting
in AI5 (Webb et al. 2018) and rising investment into new

369

AI-based businesses.6 The search is on to develop the best
AI algorithms, the fastest supercomputers, and to possess
the largest data sets.
This has resulted in what can be described as an AI race
between high-tech giants such as Facebook, Google, Amazon, Alibaba and Tencent amongst others. Governments
are not neutral in this: the Chinese government is providing much direct support for the development of AI,7 aiming
explicitly to be the world’s leader in AI by 2030 (Mubayi
et al. 2017); in 2016, the USA government8 released its
‘National Artificial Intelligence Research and Development
Strategic Plan’ and, in 2018, the UK’s Select Committee
on Artificial Intelligence, appointed by the House of Lords,
released their report on a strategic vision for AI in the UK,
arguing that ‘the UK is in a strong position to be among the
world leaders in the development of artificial intelligence
during the twenty-first century‘ (House of Lords 2018, p. 5).
The races or contests in AI development are largely in
the narrow domains of AI. These pose, at present, no existential threat to humans (Bentley 2018), although relative
lesser threats and problems in the design and application of
these narrow AI have, in recent times, been the subject of
increased scrutiny.9 For instance, narrow AI and related ICT
technologies have been misused for hacking, fake news and
have been criticized for being biased, for invading privacy
and even for threatening democracy [see Cockburn et al.
(2017), Gill (2016), Helbing et al. (2017), Susaria (2018),
Sharma (2018)]. The potential for narrow AI applications to
automate jobs and, thus, raise unemployment and inequality
have led to a growing debate and scholarly literature [see
Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017), Bessen (2018), Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2015), Frey and Osborne (2017), Ford
(2016)]. All of these issues have raised calls for more robust
government regulation and steering or control of (narrow)
AI (Baum 2017; Korinek and Stiglitz 2017; Kanbur 2018;
Metzinger et al. 2018; WEF 2018).
More concern for its existential risks to humanity has
been on races to develop an AGI. Given the huge incentives
for inventing an AGI, it is precautionary to assume that such
a race is part of the general AI race that was described in
the above paragraphs. As was mentioned, whichever hightech firm or government lab succeed in inventing the first

6

5
Webb et al. (2018, p. 5) document ‘dramatic growth’ in patent
applications at the USPTO in AI fields like machine learning, neural networks, and autonomous vehicles. For instance, the number of
annual patent applications for machine learning inventions increased
about 18-fold between 2000 and 2015.

Worldwide investment into AI start-ups increased tenfold from
USD 1.74 billion in 2013 USD 15.4 billion by 2017 (Statista 2018).
7
One of the worlds largest AI start-ups in recent years is a Chinese
company called SenseTime, who raised more than USD 1.2 billion in
start-up capital over the past 3 years. The company provides facialrecognition technology that is used in camera surveillance (Bloomberg 2018).
8
See the National Science and Technology Council (2016).
9
A survey on the economic impacts of AI, on, for instance, jobs, inequality, and productivity, is contained in Naudé (2019).

13

370

AGI will obtain a potentially world-dominating technology.
Whatever AGI first emerges will have the opportunity to
suppress any other AGI from arising (Yudkowsky 2008).
They will enjoy winner-takes-all profits.
Whereas narrow AI may pose challenges that require more
and better government control and regulation, it still poses no
existential risk to humanity (Bentley 2018). With an AGI, it
is a different matter. There are three sources of risk.
The first is that a race to be the winner in inventing an
AGI will result in a poor-quality AGI (Bostrom 2017). This
is because the competing firms in the arms race may cut
corners and compromise on the safety standards in AGI
(Armstrong et al. 2016).
A second is that the race may be won by a malevolent
group, perhaps, a terrorist group or state who then use the
AGI to either wipe out all humans or misused it against others (AI Impacts 2016; Chalmers 2010). Less dramatically,
it may be won by a self-interest group who monopolizes the
benefits of an AGI for itself (Bostrom 2017).
A third is that even if the winner designs an AGI that
appears to be friendly, it may still have compromised on
ensuring that this is the case and leave it open that the AGI
will not necessarily serve the interests of humans. In this
latter case, the challenge has been described as the ‘Fallacy of the Giant Cheesecake’. As put by Yudkowsky
(2008, p. 314–315):
‘A superintelligence could build enormous cheesecakes
cheesecakes the size of cities by golly, the future will be full
of giant cheesecakes! The question is whether the superintelligence wants to build giant cheesecakes. The vision leaps
directly from capability to actuality, without considering the
necessary intermediate of motive’.
There is no guarantee that an AGI will have the motive, or
reason, to help humans. In fact, it may even, deliberately or
accidently, wipe out humanity, or make it easier for humans
to wipe itself out.10 This uncertainty is what many see as,
perhaps, the most dangerous aspects of current investments
into developing an AGI, because no cost–benefit analysis can
be made, and risks cannot be quantified (Yudkowsky 2008).
Thus, it seems that there is a strong prudential case to be
made for steering the development of all AI, but especially
so for an AGI, where the risks are existential. In particular,
a competitive race for an AGI seems very unhelpful, as it
will accentuate the three sources of risk discussed above
(Naudé 2019).
Furthermore, a competitive race for an AGI would be
sub-optimal from the point of view of nature of an AGI as a

10
Hence ‘Moore’s Law of Mad Science: every 18 months, the minimum IQ necessary to destroy the world drops by one point’ (Yudkowsky 2008, p. 338).

13

AI & SOCIETY (2020) 35:367–379

public good (AI Impacts 2016). An AGI would be a ‘singlebest effort public good’ which is the kind of global public
good that can be supplied ‘unilaterally or multilaterally’; that
is, it requires a deliberate effort of one country or a coalition
of countries to be generated, but will benefit all countries in
the world once it is available (Barrett 2007, p. 3).
To steer the development of AGI, and specifically through
ameliorating the dangers of a race for an AGI, the literature
has identified two generic problems: the control problem
(or alignment problem) and the political problem (Bostrom
2014, 2017).
The control problem is defined by Bostrom (2014, p. v)
as ‘the problem of how to control what the superintelligence
would do’; in other words, the challenge to ‘design AI systems, such that they do what their designers intend’ (Bostrom 2017, p. 5). This is also known as the ‘alignment problem’, of how to align the objectives or values of humans with
the outcomes of what the AGI will do. Yudkowsky (2016)
illustrates why the alignment problem is a very hard problem; for instance, if the reward function (or utility function)
that the AGI optimizes indicates that all harm to humans
should be prevented, an AGI may try to prevent people from
crossing the street, given that there may be a small probability that people may get hurt by doing so. In other words, as
Gallagher (2018) has put it, the difficulty of aligning AI is
that ‘a misaligned AI does not need to be malicious to do us
harm’. See also Everitt and Hutter (2008) for a discussion of
sources of misalignment that can arise.
The political problem in AI research refers to the challenge ‘how to achieve a situation in which individuals or
institutions empowered by such AI use it in ways that promote the common good’ (Bostrom 2017, p. 5). For instance,
promoting the common good would lead society to try and
prevent that any self-interested group monopolizes the benefits of an AGI for itself (Bostrom 2017).
Both the control problem and the political problem may be
made worse if a race for an AGI starts. This is illustrated by
(Armstrong et al. 2016) who provides one of the first models
of an AI race. In their model, there are various competing
teams all racing to develop the first AGI. They are spurned on
by the incentive of reaping winner-takes-all effects and will
do so if they can by ‘skimping’ on safety precautions (including alignment) (Armstrong et al. 2016, p. 201). As winner,
they can monopolize the benefits of AGI, and during the race,
they be less concerned about alignment. The outcome could,
therefore, be of the worse kind.
The model of Armstrong et al. (2016) shows that the likelihood of avoiding an AI disaster and getting a ‘friendlier’
AGI depends crucially on reducing the number of competing teams. They also show that, with better AI development
capabilities, research teams will be less inclined to take
risks in compromising on safety and alignment. As these
are core results from which the modeling in the next section

AI & SOCIETY (2020) 35:367–379

of this paper proceeds from, it is worthwhile to provide a
short summary of the Armstrong et al. (2016) model in this
respect.
They model n different teams, each with an ability c,
and with choice s of ‘safety precautions’ (which can also be
taken to stand for degree of alignment more broadly) where
0 ≤ s ≤ 1 with s = 0 when there is no alignment and s = 1
when there is perfect alignment. They award each team a
score of (c − s) and the team with the highest score wins by
creating the first AGI. Whether or not the AGI is friendly
depends on the degree of alignment (s) of the winning team.
They assume that teams do not have a choice of c, which is
randomly assigned as given by the exogenous state of technology, and then show that the Nash equilibrium depends on
the information that the teams have about their own c and the
c of other teams. They can have either no information, only
information about their own c, or full public information
about every teams c.
Under each Nash equilibrium, Armstrong et al. (2016)
then calculates the probability of an AI disaster with either
two or five teams competing. Their results show that ‘competition might spur a race to the bottom if there are too
many teams’ (p. 205) and that ‘increasing the importance
of capability must decrease overall risk. One is less inclined
to skimp on safety precautions if one can only get a small
advantage from doing so’ (p. 204).
The unanswered question in the Armstrong et al. (2016)
model is precisely how government can steer the number
of competing teams? How can government policy reduce
competition in the race for an AGI and raise the importance
of capability? Should AI be taxed and/or nationalized?
In the next section, an all-pay contest model is used to
study the determinants of the decisions of potential AGI
competing teams to invest in and compete an AGI race and
to answer the above questions. All-pay contests models are
a class of games where various participants compete for a
prize, or more than one prize. Their distinguishing feature is
that everyone pays for participation, and so, losers will also
have to pay. Moreover, since Tullock (1980) contests have
been conceived as probabilistic competitions where despite
the effort made victory is not certain, and with the winning
probability being positively related to ones investment and
negative related to the opponents investment. They have
been applied to a variety of socio-economic situations (Konrad 2009; Kydd 2015; Vojnovic 2015). An important aspect
of contests is individual asymmetries (Siegel 2009) which,
as in the model used in the present paper, could determine if,
and how much, effort would be exerted in the competition.
It is appropriate to study an AGI arms race as an all-pay
contest given that, as Armstrong et al. (2016) also stress,
the differing ability (c in their model) of competing teams
(and their information about this c) is a determining factor
in the race. Indeed, all-pay contest models have been used

371

in the literature to study very similar problems, such as, for
instance, R&D competitions (Dasgupta 1986).
In the next section, the model is used to illustrate, inter
alia, that by taxing AI and by publicly procuring an AGI,
that the public sector could reduce the pay-off from an AGI,
raising the amount of R&D that firms need to invest in AGI
development, coordinate and incentivize co-operation, and,
hence, address the control and political problems in AI. It is
also showed that the intention (or goals) of teams competing
in an AGI race, as well as the possibility of an intermediate
outcome (second prize) may be important. Specifically, there
will be more competitors in the race if the most competitive
firm has objective probability of success, rather than profit
maximization, and if some intermediate result (or second
prize) is possible, rather than only one dominant AGI.

3 Theoretical model
The following simple model can provide some insights on
various potential teams decision to enter into and behavior
in an AGI arms race. Assuming the AGI arms race to be
a winner-takes-all type of competition (as we discussed in
Sect. 2), it can be modeled as an all-pay contest, where only
the winning team gets a prize, the invention of the AGI, but
every team has to invest resources to enter the race, and
so everyone pays. With no major loss of generality, for an
initial illustration of the model, consider the following static
framework in Sect. 3.1.

3.1 Set‑up and decision to enter the race
The decision to enter an AGI race will depend on a team’s
perceptions of the factors that will most critically affect its
possibility to win the race: (1) its own current technology,
the (2) effort made by competing teams; and (3) the unit cost
of a team’s own effort.
Suppose that i = 1, 2 denotes two teams. Each team
participates in the race for developing an AGI, which will
dominate all previous AI applications and confer a definitive
advantage over the other team. The final outcome of such
investment is normalized to 1 in case the AGI race is won,
and to 0 if the AGI race is lost. Later, this assumption of
only one prize to the winner is relaxed, and an intermediate
possibility, akin to a second prize, will be considered given
that there may still be commercial value in the investments
that the losing firm has undertaken.
If xi is the amount invested by team i in the race and
0 ≤ ai ≤ 1, then the probability for team i to win the AGI
race is given by the following:

pi = ai

(

)
xi
,
bi + xi + xj

(1)

13

372

AI & SOCIETY (2020) 35:367–379

with i ≠ j = 1, 2.
Some comments are in order.
Expression (1) is a specification of the so-called contest
function (Konrad 2009; Vojnovic 2015) which defines the
winning probability in a competition.
The parameter ai is the maximum probability that team
i will invent the dominating AGI application. In this sense,
it can interpreted as what team i can innovate, since, based
on the team’s technology and knowledge and innovation
capability, it could not achieve a higher likelihood of
success.
The number bi ≥ 0 reflects how team i can find the AGI
dominant application. This is because even if the opponent
does not invest, xj = 0 , team i may still fail to obtain the
highest successful probability ai , since, for bi > 0 , it is
)
(
xi
< ai .
ai
(2)
bi + xi
If bi = 0, then team i could achieve ai with arbitrarily small
investment xi > 0, which means that the only obstacle preventing i to obtain the highest possible success probability
is the opposing team.
Success in the race depends on how much the opponents
invest as well as on the technological difficulty associated to the R&D process. For this reason, it may be that
even with very high levels of investment, success may not
be guaranteed, since technological difficulties could be
insurmountable given the current level of knowledge, see
Marcus (2015).
Parameters ai and bi formalize the intrinsic difficulty
for team i of the AI R&D activity: the higher ai the higher
potential has i′ s technology, while the higher is bi the more
difficult is R&D. Based on (1), it follows that the total probability that one of the two teams will find the dominating
AGI application is:
)
)
(
(
x2
x1
+ a2
≤ 1,
a1
(3)
b1 + x1 + x2
b2 + x1 + x2
where (3) is satisfied with equality only if ai = 1 and bi = 0
for both i = 1, 2. When (3) is satisfied as a strict inequality,
there is a positive probability that no team would succeed
in winning the race, due to the difficulty of the R&D process, given that AGI is a ‘hard’ challenge (Van de Gevel and
Noussair 2013).
For both teams, it is assumed that the winning probability
is the objective function and that its maximization is their
goal, subject to the (economic) constraint that the expected
profit should be non-negative. Moreover, if ci is the unit cost
for team i, then the firm’s profit is a(random )variable defined
x
as: Πi = 1 − ci xi with probability ai b +xi +x and Πi = −ci xi
i
i
j
)
(
x
with probability 1 − ai b +xi +x .
i

13

i

j

This means that the team’s expected profit is given by
the following:

EΠi = ai

(

xi
bi + xi + xj

)

− ci xi

(4)

so that EΠi ≥ 0 defines self-sustainability of the R&D process, which represents the constraint in the probability maximization problem. Hence, team i’s (
problem, in
) the AGI race,
x
can be formulated as Maxxi ai b +xi +x , such that
i
i
j
)
(
x
EΠi = ai b +xi +x − ci xi ≥ 0 and xi ≥ 0.
i

i

j

Defining 𝜌i = ci − bi , it is possible to find the best
a

i

response correspondences x1 = B1 (x2 ) and x2 = B2 (x1 ) for
the two teams as follows:

x1 = B1 (x2 ) = 0,
if 𝜌1 ≤ x2

(5)

or

x1 = B1 (x2 ) = 𝜌1 − x2 ,
if otherwise, and

x2 = B2 (x1 ) = 0,
if 𝜌2 ≤ x1
or

(6)
(7)

(8)
if otherwise.
The coefficient 𝜌i is a summary of the relevant economic
and technological parameters playing a role in the AGI
arms race, including as was discussed in Sect. 2, the state
of technology, the capability of teams, the openness of
information, and the potential size of the winner-take-all
effects. For this reason, 𝜌i is the competition coefficient
of player i.
The following first result can now be formulated as
proposition 1:

x2 = B2 (x1 ) = 𝜌2 − x1 ,

Proposition 1 Suppose 𝜌1 > max(0, 𝜌2 ) : then the unique
Nash equilibrium of the AGI race is the pair of strategies
(x1 = 𝜌1 ;x2 = 0), while if max(𝜌1 , 𝜌2 ) ≤ 0 the unique Nash
equilibrium of the game is (x1 = 0;x2 = 0). If 𝜌2 > max(0, 𝜌1 )
then the unique Nash equilibrium of the game is the pair of
strategies (x1 = 0;x2 = 𝜌2 ). Finally, if 𝜌1 = 𝜌 = 𝜌2 then any
pair (x1 = x;x2 = 𝜌 − x) with 0 ≤ x ≤ 𝜌 is a Nash equilibrium
of the game.
Proof see Appendix 1. 	

◻

AI & SOCIETY (2020) 35:367–379

373

The above result provides some early, interesting,
insights. In general, in such a winner takes-all race, only
the team with the best competition coefficient will participate in the race, while the other (s) will not enter the race.
If teams have the same coefficient, they both participate
(unless 𝜌 ≤ 0) in which case, there is a multiplicity of Nash
equilibria.
When the Nash Equilibr ium is def ined by
a
(xi = ci − bi ; xj = 0), the winning probability (1) for team i
i

is as follows:

⎛ ai − bi ⎞
c
pi = ai ⎜ i ai ⎟ = ai − ci bi .
⎟
⎜
⎝ ci ⎠

(9)

3.2 Goals of competing teams
The pool of participating teams may change if teams would
pursue alternative goals. To see this, consider again two
teams, i = 1, 2 with 𝜌1 > 𝜌2 but now suppose that team 1,
rather than maximizing success probability would pursue
expected profit maximization. That is, it would solve the
following problem:

(
(
Maxx1 =Max 0, EΠ1 = a1

x1
b1 + x1 + x2

)

− c1 x1

)

(10)

such, that x1 ≥ 0.

In other words, the winning probability is equal to the maximum probability of success ai minus a term which is increasing in the unit cost and the technological parameter bi . The
smaller are these last two quantities, the closer to its maximum is team i’ s winning probability.
The above result can be generalized to any number n > 1
of teams as follows.
Corollary 1 Suppose 𝜌1 = 𝜌2 = … = 𝜌k = 𝜌 > 𝜌k+1 ≥ … ≥ 𝜌n, with
1 ≤ k ≤ n the competition coefficients of the n teams. Then,
any profile z = (x1 , x2 , … , xk , xk+1 = 0, xk+2 = 0, … , xn = 0)
with xi ≥ 0 for all i = 1, 2, … , n and Σxi = 𝜌 is a Nash equilibrium, since, for each i = 1, 2, … , n the best reply correspondence is defined as xi = Bi (x−i ) = 0 if 𝜌i ≤ x−i and
xi = Bi (x−i ) = 𝜌i − x−i , if otherwise, with x−i = z − xj .
Proof see Appendix 2. 	

machine learning, is by far dominated by only three firms:11
Amazon, IBM and Google (Webb et al. 2018).

From the first-order conditions for team 1, one can derive
the following:
√
a1
(b + x2 ) − (b1 + x2 ).
x1 = B1 (x2 ) =
(11)
c1 1
Because when 𝜌1 > 0 at x2 = 0 , it is 0 < B1 (0) =
√
a1
b − b1 < 𝜌1, and since (11) is concave in x2 , with
c 1
1

B1 (x2 ) = 0 at x2 = −b1 and x2 = 𝜌1, the following holds:

Proposition 2 Suppose that 𝜌1 > 0 . If

It is easy to see that any of the above profiles is a Nash
equilibrium by simply checking that each component is best
reply against the remaining ones.
To summarize, in a winner-takes-all race for developing
an AGI, where players must invest in R&D effort to maximize success probability, only the most competitive teams
will participate, while the others would prefer not to. This
suggests that, given the ‘hard’ challenge that AGI poses, the
degree of competition in the race, as reflected by the number
of competing teams, is unlikely to be very large, thus potentially signaling that the control problem is not as arduous as
may be assumed. Armstrong et al. (2016) is, for instance,
concerned about the number of teams competing for AI. The
conclusion that the number of competing teams for a AGI
will never be very large seems at least at present, to be borne
out by the fact that most of the competitive research into
AI, as reflected by USA patent applications in, for example,

1

b − b1 ≥
c1 1

of the game is
Max(0, 𝜌2 ), then the unique Nash equilibrium
√a
1
the pair of strategies (x1 = c b1 − b1 ;x2 = 0) . If
1
√a
2
1
0 < c b1 − b1 ≤ 𝜌2 , then (x1 = 𝜌2 − x2 ;x2 = (𝜌2 +ba 1 ) c1 − b1 ) is
1

◻

√a

1

the unique Nash equilibrium:
Proof see Appendix 3 	

◻

Proposition 2 illustrates conditions for which both teams
could participate in the AGI race, but pursue different goals.
The intuition is the following. If the more competitive team
maximizes profit, then, in general, it would invest less to try
to win the race, than when aiming to maximize the probability of winning. As a result, the less competitive team
would not be discouraged by an opponent whom invests a
high amount, and in turn, take part in the race.

11

This does not, however, take into account Chinese firms such as
Tencent and Alibaba, both whom have been doing increased research
into AI. Still, the general conclusion is that the number of serious
contenders for the AGI prize is no more than half a dozen or so.

13

374

AI & SOCIETY (2020) 35:367–379

4 Comparative statics and policy
implications

that is as if the race was still with two outcomes, 0 and 1, but
x
with success probability now given by (ai + 𝛼di )( b +xi +x )
i

rather than only by ai ( b +xi +x ).
x

In this section, it is explored how the teams’ behavior can be
affected by changing some of the elements in the race. In the
first Sect. 4.1, the set of possible race outcomes are enlarged.

4.1 A more general AGI race: allowing for a second
prize
Consider again the previous two team model but suppose that
the set of outcomes rather than being 0 or 1, that is either the
dominant AGI application is found, or nothing is found, there
is a possible third result 0 < 𝛼 < 1. This is to model the idea
that some intermediate outcome, between dominance and failure, could obtain even when the most desirable AGI application is not achieved. This is akin to a ‘second prize’.
The interest here is in exploring how such partial success
(failure) could impact on the investment decision of participating teams. Moreover, introducing a third outcome (or second
prize) can provide insights on the possible role of the public
sector in steering the AGI race.
In what follows, it is assumed that achieving the dominant
AGI application implies also obtaining the intermediate outcome, but that, in this case, only the dominant application will
matter. Moreover, to keep things sufficiently simple, team i’s
probability of obtaining only the intermediate outcome is
x
given by di ( b +xi +x ), with 0 < 𝛼i ≤ di < 1, modeling the idea
i

i

j

that the technology for obtaining such AGI application is the
same as for the dominant application, except for a higher upper
bound in the success probability.
For this reason, assuming that 0 ≤ (𝛼i + di ) ≤ 1 team i’s
profit function can take on three possibilities:

Πi =1 − ci xi with probability ai

(

Πi =𝛼 − ci xi with probability di

)

xi
,
bi + xi + xj

(

)
xi
,
bi + xi + xj

i

i

i

j

j

Notice that (12)–(14) implies that, unlike the dominant
winner-takes-all AGI application, 𝛼 could also be obtained
by both teams and not by one of them only.
Therefore, posing á i = (ai + 𝛼di ) and defining the modi𝛼́
fied competition coefficient as 𝜌́i = ci − bi , the following
i

is an immediate consequence of Proposition 1:

Corollary 2 Suppose 𝜌́ 1 > max(0, 𝜌́ 2 ) : then the unique
Nash equilibrium of the AGI race is the pair of strategies
(x1 = 𝜌́ 1 ;x2 = 0), while if max(𝜌́ 1 , 𝜌́ 2 ) ≤ 0 the unique Nash
equilibrium of the game is (x1 = 0;x2 = 0). If 𝜌́ 2 > max(0, 𝜌́ 1 ),
then the unique Nash equilibrium of the game is the pair of
strategies (x1 = 0;x2 = 𝜌́ 2 . Finally, if 𝜌́ 1 = 𝜌 = 𝜌́ 2 , then any
pair (x1 = x;x2 = 𝜌́ − x) with 0 ≤ x ≤ 𝜌́ is a Nash equilibrium
of the game.
The implication from this extension is as follows. Since
á i > a, then 𝜌́ i > 𝜌i : therefore, when a second prize is possible, teams in the race will tend to invest more than without
such a possibility. Therefore, the presence of such intermediate result or second prize serve as an incentive to strengthen
team efforts, increasing both the probability of finding the
dominant AGI application as well as the non-dominant one.
The outcome reduces the risk of complete failure and in so
doing induces higher investments than in a pure winner-takesall race.
In this case, it is easy to see that outcome 1 would be
obtained with probability:

ṕ i =

(á i − ci bi )á i
á i

(16)

(12)

and outcome 𝛼 with probability:

(13)

⎛ ái − bi ⎞ d (á − c b ) d ṕ
c
i i
= i i.
qi = di ⎜ i á ⎟ = i i
i
⎟
⎜
ái
ái
⎝ ci ⎠

(17)

i
, that is if di is small enough.
with qi < ṕi if ai < di < (1−𝛼)

a

(
Πi = − ci xi with probability 1 − (ai + di )

)

xi
,
bi + xi + xj
(14)
and its expected profit is given by the following:
(
EΠi = (ai + 𝛼di )

13

xi
bi + xi + xj

)

− ci xi ,

(15)

4.2 Policy implications
One of the main conclusions from the literature surveyed
in Sect. 2 is that the avoidance of an AGI race would
require government to influence AGI research in a manner that will reduce the returns to teams from taking risks
in AI development.

AI & SOCIETY (2020) 35:367–379

In this regard, the model results set out in the preceding
sections suggest a number of policy implications to steer the
race for an AGI.
To see this, first, consider the above winner-takes-all race
with no intermediate outcome (no second prize) (Sect. 3.1)
and assume that the dominant AGI application, if found,
would be considered by a public authority undesirable
(unfriendly) perhaps due to the fact that the winning team
took too many risks and ‘skimped’ on safety regulations.
What could the public sector do to decrease the likelihood
of such an unfriendly discovery?
In the following sub-sections, four public policy initiatives that emanates from the model are discussed: (1) introducing an intermediate prize, (2) using public procurement
of innovation, (3) taxing an AGI, and (4) addressing patenting by AI.
4.2.1 Introducing an intermediate prize
One drastic measure would be to prohibit altogether teams
(firms) to work towards an AGI, declaring the existential
risk to humanity (as was discussed in Sect. 2) to be the overriding constraint. This seems, however, not to be feasible.
The alternative is then not to prohibit the race, but to
restrict the number of teams that compete in the race and to
incentivize these teams to invest more in pursuing a quality,
friendly, AGI. Given the difficult challenge that AGI poses,
Sect. 3.1 has shown that, in any case, only the most competitive teams will compete: at present, in the world, there
may, perhaps, be only half a dozen or so teams that could
seriously compete for an AGI.
Keeping this competitive, and even raising the bar and
incentivizing such teams to invest more in finding a dominant AGI, the public sector could introduce second prizes,
that is prizes for intermediate results (i.e., advanced, but not
dominating AIs). According to the model presented in this
paper, this will increase the amount of resources invested to
maximize success probability p. In doing so, it will either
reduce the number of teams who could afford to participate
and/or increase the amount of investment. This will help to
reduce the control and political problems characterizing AI.
4.2.2 Public procurement of innovation
How could the public sector in practice introduce an intermediate prize? It is proposed here that the public procurement of innovation can be a useful instrument in this regard,
and moreover one that has so far been neglected in the control or alignment of AI. Public procurement of innovation
could attempt to steer AGI in a friendly direction by requiring that certain constraints be engineered into the AI, and by
assisting the development of complementary technologies.

375

As far as the engineering of constraints into AI is concerned, the two key questions are: what constraints? and how
to engineer these into AI?
Regarding the first question, Chalmers (2010, p. 31) discusses two types of constraints that will be important: internal constraints, which refers to the internal program of the
AGI, wherein its ethical values can be encoded, for instance,
in giving it reduced autonomy or prohibiting it from having its own goals; and external constraints, which refers to
limitations on the relationship between humans and AGI for
instance in dis-incentivizing the development of AGI that
replaces human labor and incentivizing the development of
AGI that enhances human labor, and in trying to first create
a AGI in a virtual world without direct contact with the real
world (although Chalmers (2010) concludes that this may
be very difficult and, perhaps, even impossible to ensure).
Chalmers (2010) suggests that the internal constraints
on an AGI could be fashioned through amongst others the
method by which humans build an AGI. If an AGI is based
on brain emulation rather than non-human data learning systems as is primary the current case, it may end up with different values, perhaps more akin to human values. In addition, if values are established through allow the AGI to learn
and evolve, then initial conditions as well as the punishment/
reward system for learning would be important to get right at
the start. Care should be taken, however, to remove human
biases from AGI, especially when they learn from data created by biased humans. Concerns have already been raised
about AI reinforcing stereotypes (Cockburn et al. 2017).
Regarding the second question, it can be proposed that
public procurement of innovation considers learning from
the previous examples where the public sector attempted to
steer technology, in particular where coordination and transparency are important outcomes. Two related approaches
spring here to mind, namely the concept of Responsible
Innovation (RI) [see, for instance, Foley et al. (2016)]
and the value sensitive design (VSD) framework [see, for
instance, Johri and Nair (2011) and Umbrello (2019)].
Regarding the latter, Umbrello (2019, p. 1) argues that
VSD is a ‘potentially suitable methodology for artificial
intelligence coordination between the often-disparate public, government bodies, and industry’. Thus, the constraints
that were mentioned may be best built into AI applications
if public procurement takes into consideration that the role
of engineers and programmers are critical ‘both during and
after the design of a technology’ (Umbrello 2019, p. 1). See
also Umbrello and De Bellis (2018) for a theoretical case
and Johri and Nair (2011) for an application to the case of
the development of an ICT system in India.
In this regard, a further policy implication that emanates from
the model in this paper is that it may be important to promote
complementary inventions in AI. This could also be done through
public procurement of innovation, where the needed coordination

13

376

could be better fostered. For instance, other complementary innovations to stimulate may be in technologies that enhance human
intelligence and integrate human and artificial intelligence over
the longer term. Chalmers (2010) speculates that, once humans
live in an AGI world, the options will be either extinction, isolation, inferiority, or integration of humans and AGIs.
A second role for public procurement of innovation, in
addition to helping with the engineering of constraints into
AI, is to help generate complementary innovations. This can
be done, for instance, by stimulating research into how ICT
can enhance human biology, and, perhaps, even dispense with
it completely, may be needed, for instance in genetic engineering and nanotechnology. In particular, projects that study
the challenges in and consequences of uploading brains and/
or consciousness onto computers, or implant computer chips
and neural pathways into brains, have been gaining traction in
the literature and popular media, and form the core agenda of
transhumanism (O’Connell 2017).
A strong argument for public procurement rests on its ability to coordinate the search for an AGI, and thus avoid excess
competition, as suggested for example by the EU legal provisions on ‘pre-commercial procurement of innovation’ (European Commission 2007), as well as on the EU ‘innovation
partnership’ (European Commission 2014). In particular, the
‘innovation partnership’ explicitly encourages a collaborative agreement between contracting authorities and the firms
selected to develop an innovative solution.
The case for public procurement of AGI innovation is made
stronger by the fact that because an AGI is a public good of
the single-best effort type, a government coalition, such as the
EU should drive the development, rather than risk, it being
developed by the private tech-industry. In essence, this would
boil down to the nationalization of AGI with the added advantage that the danger of the misuse of AGI technology may be
reduced, see Floridi (2018) and Nordhaus (2015). It may also
prevent private monopolies to capture all the rents from AGI
innovations (Korinek and Stiglitz 2017).
4.2.3 Taxation
A third policy proposal from the model presented in this section is that the government announce the introduction of a tax
rate 0 < t < 1, on the team that would find the dominant AGI,
with t depending on the extent to which the AGI is unfriendly.
The taxation policy would, thus, be calibrated by the government in such a way that for a friendly AGI the tax rate t is low
and higher for unfriendly AGI. For example, if t = 1 for the
most unfriendly solution, then, in general, the tax rate could
be defined as follows:

t(f ) = 1 − f ,
where 0 ≤ f ≤ 1 is a numerical indicator set by the government to measure the friendliness of the AGI solution, with

13

AI & SOCIETY (2020) 35:367–379

f = 0 indicating the most undesirable solution and f = 1
the most desirable one. In this case, for team i the expected
profit is as follows:
EΠi = (1 − t)ai

(

xi
bi + xi + xj

)

− ci xi ,

(18)

with the competition coefficient becoming
(1−t)a
𝛿i = c i − bi < 𝜌i, so that the amount of resources invested
i

and, accordingly, the success probability of the AGI dominant application would decrease. Notice that 𝛿i > 0 if:

t <1−

bi ci
.
ai

(19)

This implies that, for a large enough tax rate, teams could be
completely discouraged to pursue investing in finding such
AGI dominant application. The introduction of a tax rate is
equivalent to an intermediate outcome defined now as
𝛼d
t = − a i . In this case, 𝛼 can be interpreted as an additional
i

(random) component of the cost, which can only take place
probabilistically.
With a high enough tax rate, the effect could be seen
as equivalent of nationalizing the AGI. A combination of
a high tax rate on an unfriendly AGI together with the
public procurement of a friendly AGI that aim to establish
a (government-lead) coalition to drive the development
of AGI may be the more pertinent policy recommendation to emerge from our analysis, given that much R&D
in AI currently tends to be open (and may be given further
impetus through the public procurement process) (Bostrom
2017). With more information about the capabilities of
teams, including their source codes, data and organizational intent known, the ‘more the danger [of an unfriendly
AGI] increases’ (Armstrong et al. 2016, p. 201).
One final but important remark to make with respect
to the taxation of AI is that, in the afore-going, the treatment of taxation has been as if there is only a single government and that the AI arms race occur in one country.
In a globalized economy where there are tax havens, tax
competition, and loopholes, it is even proving difficult for
governments to tax ‘old-economy’ firms. What would ultimately be needed would be global coordination of taxation
and regulation of AI. This is recognized, for instance, in
the ‘Strategy of New Technologies’ adopted by the United
Nations Secretary-General, who in reference to technologies such as AI states that ‘collective global responses
are necessary’ (United Nations 2018, p. 10). While the
principle of global coordination of AI regulation and taxation is clear, practically over the short-term at least, as the
vast bulk of advanced research on AI is conducted in only
a handful of countries [see WIPO (2019)], the need for
global coordination is perhaps not acute.

AI & SOCIETY (2020) 35:367–379

4.2.4 Addressing patenting by AI
A finally policy recommendation that can be derived from
the model presented in Sects. 3 and 4.1 is that patent law and
the legal status of AGI inventions will need to be amended to
reduce the riskiness of AGI races. In this respect, the World
Economic Forum (WEF 2018) has warned that because an
AGI will be able to innovate, the firm that invents the first
AGI will enjoy a huge first-mover advantage if the innovations made by the AGI will enjoy patent protection. Others,
such as Jankel (2015), have been more dismissive of the
potential of AI generating truly original and disruptive innovations. The debate is, however, far from settled.
In terms of the model presented, patent protection may
raise the returns from investing in a dramatic fashion and
will raise the number of teams competing. This is a topic
that, however, needs more research and more careful modeling and is left for future research.

5 Concluding remarks
Steering the development of an artificial general (or super)
intelligence (AGI) may be enormously important for future
economic development, in particular, since there may only
be one chance to get it right (Bostrom 2014). Even though
current AI is nowhere close to being an AGI and does not
pose any existential risks, it may be prudent to assume that
an arms race for such a technology may be underway or
imminent. This is because the economic gains to whichever
firm or government lab invents the worlds first AGI) will
be immense. Such AGI races could, however, be very detrimental and even pose an existential threat to humanity if it
results in an unfriendly AI.
In this paper, it was argued that any race for an AGI will
exacerbate the dangers of an unfriendly AI. An all-pay contest model was presented to derive implications for public policy in steering the development of an AGI towards
a friendly AI, in other words address what is known in the
AI research literature as the control and political problems
of AI.
It was established that in a winner-takes-all race for developing an AGI, where players must invest in R&D, only the
most competitive teams will participate. This suggests that,
given the difficulties of creating an AGI, the degree of competition in the race, as reflected by the number of competing
teams, is unlikely ever to be very large. This seems to be
reflected in current reality, as the current number of feasible
teams able to compete in an AGI race is quite low at around
half a dozen or so.
It was also established that the intention (or goals) of
teams competing in an AGI race as well as the possibility of an intermediate outcome (‘second prize’) may be

377

important. Crucially, there will be more competitors in
the race if the most competitive firm has objective and the
probability of profit maximization rather than success, and
if some intermediate result (or second prize) is possible,
rather than only one dominant prize. Moreover, the possibility of a second prize is showed to raise the probability
of finding the dominant AGI application, and, hence, will
give more urgency to public policy addressing the control
and political problems of AI.
Given that it is infeasible to ban an AGI race, it was
shown in this paper that the danger of an unfriendly AGI
can be reduced through a number of public policies. Specifically, four public policy initiatives were discussed: (1)
introducing an intermediate prize (2) using public procurement of innovation, (3) taxing an AGI, and (4) addressing
patenting by AI.
These public policy recommendations can be summarized by stating that, by taxing AI and by publicly procuring an AGI, the public sector could reduce the pay-off
from an AGI, raise the amount of R&D that firms need
to invest in AGI development, and coordinate and incentivize co-operation. This will help to address the control
and political problems in AI. Future research is needed
to elaborate the design of systems of public procurement
of AI innovation and for appropriately adjusting the legal
frameworks underpinning high-tech innovation, in particular dealing with patenting by AI.
Acknowledgements We are grateful to participants at workshop,
seminars, and meetings in Aachen, Brighton, and Utrecht for their
many helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper, in particular
Ramona Apostol, Tommaso Ciarli, Stephan Corvers, Geraint Johnes,
Thomas Kittsteiner, Oliver Lorz, Marion Ott, Frank Piller, Francesco
Porpiglia, Anne Rainville, Erik Stam, and Ed Steinmueller. We also
want to thank two anonymous referees for taking the time to read our
paper, and for their valuable comments. All errors and omissions are
ours alone.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creat​iveco​
mmons​.org/licen​ses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.

Appendix 1
With two teams, it is possible to suggest a proof which could
be graphically visualized. Suppose that 𝜌1 < max(0, 𝜌2 ). It
follows that team 1’s best response is x1 = B1 (x2 ) = 0 if
𝜌1 ≤ x2 and x1 = B1 (x2 ) = 𝜌1 − x2 , if otherwise.
when 𝜌1 > x2 can be written as x2 = 𝜌1 − x1 . Then,
it follows immediately that team 2’s best response is
x2 = B2 (x1 ) = 0 if 𝜌2 ≤ x1 𝜌2 − x1 and x2 = B2 (x1 ) = 𝜌2 − x1,

13

378

AI & SOCIETY (2020) 35:367–379

if otherwise. This response can meet team 1’s best
response only at x1 = 𝜌1 and x2 = 0.
Analogously, if 𝜌2 > max(0, 𝜌1 ), then the two best replies
meet only at x1 = 0 and x2 = 𝜌2 . Finally, if 𝜌1 = 𝜌 = 𝜌2 the
two best replies overlap along the segment x2 = 𝜌 − x1 and
so any pair (x1 = x;x2 = 𝜌 − x) with 0 ≤ x ≤ 𝜌 is a Nash equilibrium of the game.

Appendix 2
Suppose that 𝜌1 = 𝜌2 = … = 𝜌k = 𝜌 > 𝜌k+1 ≥ … ≥ 𝜌n, with
1 ≤ k ≤ n are the competition coefficients of the n teams, and
consider profile

z = (x1 , x2 , … , xk , xk+1 = 0, xk+2 = 0, … , xn = 0)
with xi ≥ 0 for all i = 1, 2, … , n and Σi xi = 𝜌.
It is easy to see that the profile is a Nash equilibrium by
simply checking that each component is best reply against
the others. Indeed, consider team 1, and notice that the
argument will be identical for any team i with 1 < i < k + 1.
If Σi=2 xi < 𝜌 and xk+1 = 0, xk+2 = 0, … , xn = 0 , then
x−1 = Σi=2 xi < 𝜌 and its best reply would be x1 = 𝜌 − x−1,
so that Σi xi = 𝜌 = Σi xi .
Consider now any team i = k + 1; the same argument
will hold for all i > k + 1. In this case, x−(k+1) = Σi≠(k+1), and
so, team (k + 1)’s best response would be xk+1 = 0 , which
proves the result.

Appendix 3
Suppose team 1’s best response is as follows:
√
a1
(b + x2 ) − (b1 + x2 ).
x1 = B1 (x2 ) =
c1 1
Because when 𝜌1 > 0 at x2 = 0, it is 0 < B1 (0) =
and since

d2 B1 (x2 )
dx22

√a

b − b1,
c1 1
1

( )2 ( )
−3
a1
1 a1
=−
(b1 + x2 ) 2 < 0,
4 b1
b1

then B1 (x2 ) is concave in
√xa2 with B1 (x2 ) = 0 at x2 = −b1 and
x2 = 𝜌1. Therefore, if c1 b1 − b1 ≥ max(0, 𝜌2 ) it follows
1

immediately that team 2’s best response is
x2 = B2 (x1 ) = 0 if 𝜌2 ≤ x1, and x2 = B2 (x1 ) = 𝜌2 − x1, if
otherwise.
√a
This will match B1 (x2 ) only at (x1 = c1 b1 − b1 ; x2 = 0,
1

which is the unique√Nash equilibrium pair of investments.
a
However, if 0 < c1 b1 − b1 < 𝜌2 , then the two best
1

13

response match at the unique point (x1 = 𝜌2 − x2 ;
𝜌 +b )2 c
x2 = ( 2 a1 1 ) − b1 ), which is the only Nash equilibrium.
1

References
Acemoglu D, Restrepo P (2017) Robots and jobs: evidence from US
labor markets. In: NBER Working Paper no. 23285. National
Bureau for Economic Research
AI Impacts (2015) Predictions of human-level AI timelines. AI
impacts. https​://aiimp​acts.org/predi​ction​s-of-human​-level​-aitimel​ines/. Accessed 10 Apr 2019
AI Impacts (2016) Friendly ai as a global public good. AI Impacts
online. https ​ : //aiimp ​ a cts.org/frien ​ d ly-ai-as-a-globa ​ l -publi​
c-good/. Accessed 10 Apr 2019
Armstrong S, Bostrom N, Schulman C (2016) Racing to the precipice: a model of artificial intelligence development. AI Soc
31:201–206
Barrett S (2007) Why cooperate? The incentive to supply global
public goods. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Baum S (2017) On the promotion of safe and socially beneficial
artificial intelligence. AI Soc 32(4):543–555
Bentley P (2018) The three laws of artificial intelligence: dispelling
common myths. In: Metzinger T, Bentley PJ, Häggström O,
Brundage M (eds) Should we fear artificial intelligence? EPRS
European Parliamentary Research Centre, Brussels, pp 6–12
Bessen J (2018) AI and jobs: the role of demand. In: NBER Working Paper no. 24235. National Bureau for Economic Research
Bloomberg (2018) The world’s biggest AI start-up raises USD 1,2
billion in mere months. Fortune Magazine, 31 May 2018
Bostrom N (2014) Superintelligence: paths, dangers, strategies.
Oxford University Press, Oxford
Bostrom N (2017) Strategic implications of openness in AI development. Global policy, p 1–14
Brynjolfsson E, McAfee A (2015) Will humans go the way of
horses? Foreign Affairs 94:8–14
Brynjolfsson E, Rock D, Syverson C (2017) Artificial intelligence
and the modern productivity paradox: a clash of expectations
and statistics. In: NBER Working Paper no. 24001. National
Bureau for Economic Research
Chalmers D (2010) The singularity: a philosophical analysis. J Conscious Stud 17(9):7–65
Cockburn I, Henderson R, Stern S (2017) The impact of artificial
intelligence on innovation. In: Paper presented at the nber conference on research issues in artificial intelligence, Toronto
Cukier K (2018) The data-driven world. In: Franklin D (ed) Megatech: technology in 2050. London: Profile Books. Chapter 14,
pp 164–173
Dasgupta P (1986) The theory of technological competition. In:
Stiglitz J, Mathewson GF (eds) New developments in the analysis of market structure. MIT Press, Cambridge, pp 519–547
European Commission (2007) Pre-commercial Procurement: driving
innovation to ensure sustainable high quality public services in
Europe. Brussels: EC Communication 799
European Commission (2014) European directive on public procurement and repealing directive 2004/18/ec. Brussels: EC
Evans J (2017) The art of losing control: a philosopher’s search for
ecstatic experience. Canongate Books, Edinburgh
Everitt T, Hutter M (2008) The alignment problem for history-based
bayesian reinforcement learners. Australian National University,
Mimeo
Floridi L (2018) The ethics of artificial intelligence. In: Franklin
D (ed) Megatech: technology in 2050. London: Profile Books.
Chapter 13, pp 155–163

AI & SOCIETY (2020) 35:367–379
Foley R, Bernstein M, Wiek A (2016) Towards an alignment of activities, aspirations and stakeholders for responsible innovation. J
Responsib Innov 3(3):209–232
Ford M (2016) The rise of the robots: technology and the threat of
mass unemployment. Oneworld Publications, London
Frey C, Osborne M (2017) The future of employment: how susceptible are jobs to computerization? Technol Forecast Soc Change
114:254–280
Gallagher B (2018) Scary AI is more fantasia than terminator. Nautilus.
http://nauti​l.us/issue​/58/self/scary​-ai-is-more-fanta​sia-than-termi​
nator​. Accessed 1 Aug 2018
Gill K (2016) Artificial super intelligence: beyond rhetoric. AI Soc
31(2):137–143
Harari Y (2011) Sapiens: a brief history of humankind. Vintage,
London
Harari Y (2016) Homo deus: a brief history of tomorrow. Vintage,
London
Helbing D, Frey B, Gigerenzer G, Hafen E, Hagner M, Hofstetter Y,
van der Hoven J, Zicari R, Zwitter A (2017) Will democracy survive big data and artificial intelligence? Scientific American. https​
://www.scien​tific​ameri​can.com/artic​le/will-democ​racy-survi​vebig-data-and-artif​i cial​-intel​ligen​ce/. Accessed 10 Apr 2019
House of Lords (2018) AI in the UK: ready, willing and able? Select
committee on artificial intelligence, HL Paper 100
Jankel N (2015) AI vs human intelligence: why computers will never
create disruptive innovations. Huffington Post. https​://www.huffp​
ost.com/entry​/ai-vs-human​-intel​ligen​ce-_b_67418​14. Accessed
10 Apr 2019
Johri A, Nair S (2011) The role of design values in information
system development for human benefit. Inf Technol People
24(3):281–302
Kanbur R (2018) On three canonical responses to labour saving technical change. VOX CEPR’s Policy Portal. https​://voxeu​.org/artic​
le/three​-canon​ical-respo​nses-labou​r-savin​g-techn​ical-chang​e.
Accessed 10 Apr 2019
Konrad K (2009) Strategy and dynamics in contests. Oxford University
Press, Oxford
Korinek A, Stiglitz J (2017) Artificial intelligence and its implications
for income distribution and unemployment. In: NBER Working
Paper no. 24174. National Bureau for Economic Research
Kurzweil R (2005) The singularity is near: when humans transcend
biology. Viking Press, New York
Kydd A (2015) International relations theory: the game-theoretic
approach. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G (2015) Deep learning. Nature
521:436–444
Makridakis S (2017) The forthcoming artificial intelligence (AI) revolution: it’s impact on society and firms. Futures 90:46–60
Marcus G (2015) Machines won’t be thinking anytime soon. Edge.
https​://www.edge.org/respo​nse-detai​l/26175​. Accessed 10 Apr
2019
Metzinger T, Bentley P, Häggström O, Brundage M (2018) Should
we fear artificial intelligence? EPRS—European Parliamentary
Research Centre
Mubayi P, Cheng E, Terry H, Tilton A, Hou T, Lu D, Keung R, Liu
F (2017) China’s rise in artificial intelligence. Equity Research,
Goldman Sachs
National Science and Technology Council (2016) The national artificial
intelligence research and development strategic plan. In: Executive Office of the President of the United States
Naudé W (2019) From the race against the robots to the fallacy of the
giant cheesecake: a survey of the immediate and imagined economic impacts of artificial intelligence. In: UNU-MERIT Working
Paper no. 2019-005

379
New Scientist (2017) Machines that think. John Murray Learning,
London
Nordhaus W (2015) Are we approaching an economic singularity?
In: Information technology and the future of economic growth.
Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper no. 2021. Yale University
O’Connell M (2017) To be a machine: adventures among cyborgs,
utopians, hackers, and the futurists solving the modest problem
of death. Doubleday Books, New York
PwC (2017) Sizing the Prize. PriceWaterhouseCooper
Roff H (2014) The strategic robot problem: lethal autonomous weapons
in war. J Military Ethics 13(3):211–227
Sharma K (2018) Can we keep our biases from creeping into AI? Harvard Business Review. https​://hbr.org/produ​ct/can-we-keep-ourbiase​s-from-creep​ing-into-ai/H045T​W-PDF-ENG. Accessed 10
Apr 2019
Siegel R (2009) All-pay contests. Econometrica 77(1):71–92
Statista (2018) Funding of artificial intelligence (AI) startup companies
worldwide, from 2013 to 2017. https​://www.stati​sta.com/stati​stics​
/62146​8/world​wide-artif​i cial​-intel​ligen​ce-start​up-compa​ny-fundi​
ng-by-year/. Accessed 1 Aug 2018
Susaria A (2018) How artificial intelligence can detect -and create—-fake news. The conversation, 3 May. http://theco​nvers​ation​.com/
how-artif​i cial​-intel​ligen​ce-can-detec​t-and-creat​e-fake-news-95404​
. Accessed 10 Apr 2019
Trajtenberg M (2018) AI as the next GPT: a political-economy perspective. In: NBER Working Paper no. 24245. National Bureau
for Economic Research
Tullock G (1980) Efficient rent seeking. In: Buchanan JM, Tollison
RD, Tullock G (eds) Toward a theory of the rent seeking society.
Texas A&M University Press, Texas, pp 97–112
Umbrello S (2019) Beneficial AI coordination by means of a value
sensitive design approach. Big Data Cogn Comput 3(5):1–13
Umbrello S, De Bellis A (2018) A value-sensitive design approach to
intelligent agents. In: Yampolskiy RV (ed) Artificial intelligence
safety and security. CRC Press, Boca Raton, pp 395–410
United Nations (2018) UN secretary-general’s strategy on new technology. United Nations, New York. https​://www.un.org/en/newte​
chnol​ogies​/. Accessed 10 Apr 2019
Van de Gevel AJW, Noussair CN (2013) The nexus between artificial intelligence and economics. SpringerBriefs in economics,
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. https​://link.sprin​ger.com/conte​nt/
pdf/bfm%3A978​-3-642-33648​-5/1.pdf. Accessed 10 Apr 2019
Vojnovic M (2015) Contest Theory. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Webb M, Short N, Bloom N, Lerner J (2018) Some Facts of High-Tech
Patenting. In: NBER Working Paper no. 24793. National Bureau
for Economic Research
WEF (2018) artificial intelligence collides with patent law. In: Center
for the fourth industrial revolution. Geneva: World Economic
Forum
WIPO (2019) Technology trends 2019: artificial intelligence. Geneva:
World Intellectual Property Organization
Yudkowsky E (2008) Artificial intelligence as a positive and negative
factor in global risk. In: Bostrom N, Cirkovic MN (eds) Global
catastrophic risks. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 308–345
(Chapter 15)
Yudkowsky E (2016) The AI alignment problem: why it is hard, and
where to start. Machine Intelligence Research Institute, Mimeo
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

13

