--- PAGE 1 ---
AI threats to national security can be countered through
an incident regime
Alejandro Ortega∗
alejandro@apolloresearch.ai
Abstract
Recent progress in AI capabilities has heightened concerns that AI systems could
pose a threat to national security, for example, by making it easier for malicious actors
to perform cyberattacks on critical national infrastructure or through loss of control
of autonomous AI systems. In parallel, federal legislators in the U.S. have proposed
nascent ‘AI incident regimes’ to identify and counter similar threats. In this paper,
we consolidate these two trends and present a timely proposal for a legally mandated
post-deployment AI incident regime that aims to counter potential national security
threats from AI systems. We start the paper by introducing the concept of ‘security-
critical’ to describe sectors that pose extreme risks to national security before arguing
that ’security-critical’ describes civilian nuclear power, aviation, life science dual-use
research of concern, and frontier AI development. We then present in detail our AI
incident regime proposal, justifying each component of the proposal by demonstrating its
similarity to U.S. domestic incident regimes in other ‘security-critical’ sectors. Finally,
we sketch a hypothetical scenario where our proposed AI incident regime deals with an
AI cyber incident. Our proposed AI incident regime is split into three phases. The first
phase revolves around a novel operationalization of what counts as an ‘AI incident,’
and we suggest that AI providers must create a ‘national security case’ before deploying
a frontier AI system. The second and third phases spell out that AI providers should
notify a government agency about incidents and that the government agency should be
involved in amending AI providers’ security and safety procedures in order to counter
future threats to national security.
1
Introduction
Recent advances in AI capabilities (Maslej et al., 2024; Roser, 2022) have sharpened U.S.
(United States) government attention on the possibility that AI systems could pose significant
national security threats (NIST, 2024; Executive Office of the President, 2025), for example,
∗I would like to thank Charlotte Stix for generous guidance and help throughout the writing of this paper;
as well as to several people who gave comments on an earlier draft: Kevin Wei, Mia Hoffman, Patricia Paskov,
Chlo´e Touzet, Merlin Stein, Jimmy Farrell, and Connor Dunlop.
1
arXiv:2503.19887v5  [cs.CY]  16 Apr 2025

--- PAGE 2 ---
by enabling sophisticated cyberattacks (Hazell, 2023), accelerating bioweapon development
(Esvelt et al., 2024), or evading human control (Hendrycks et al., 2023).
While current AI systems likely do not pose threats to national security (Bengio et al.,
2025), recently there has been fast progress in the dangerous capabilities that AI systems
possess: OpenAI denoted its frontier system released in July 2024 (GPT-4o) as posing a ‘low’
cyber and CBRN risk (Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear) (OpenAI, 2024a),
but its frontier system only 7 months later (o1, released in December 2024) was already
designated ‘medium’ risk on both these categories (OpenAI, 2024b). It is not clear if future
AI systems will maintain this trend, but in light of recent progress, it may be prudent for
nation-states to build up capacity both to track the national security threats that AI systems
pose and to execute countermeasures to neutralize these threats. Against this backdrop of
growing AI capabilities, U.S. federal legislators have started proposing nascent variations of
‘AI incident reporting regimes’ (118th Congress, 2024; Ross, 2024).
We combine these two strands – increased government interest in both the national security
risks posed by AI systems, and in AI incident regimes – to focus on the role that a legally
mandated post-public deployment AI incident regime could play in giving a government
agency oversight into national security threats posed by AI systems. Our ambition is to
enable a government agency to maintain a comprehensive awareness of AI threats and rapidly
counter any resulting risks to national security.
In this paper, we put forward a proposal for an AI incident regime that will help to counter
threats to national security posed by AI systems. We start the paper by introducing a novel
term – ‘security-critical’ – to describe sectors that pose extreme risks to national security,
before arguing that civilian nuclear power, aviation, and life sciences dual-use research of
concern, and frontier AI development should all be considered ‘security-critical’ sectors. We
then spend much of the paper detailing our proposal for an AI incident regime that aims
to counter national security threats from AI systems. We justify each component of our
AI incident proposal by demonstrating that it mirrors existing regimes in security-critical
industries, specifically U.S. domestic incident regimes in civilian aviation, life sciences dual-use
research of concern (e.g., genetic engineering), and nuclear power.
Informed by this comparison to other high-risk areas, our proposed AI incident regime
consists of three phases. First, a ‘Preparatory Phase, which details steps that AI providers
should take in order to define which events count as ‘incidents’ ahead of time; then the ‘Rapid
Response Phase,’ in which AI providers promptly notify a government agency about incidents,
and this government agency taking steps to contain the incidents; and finally the ‘Hardening
Defenses Phase,’ wherein AI providers improve their security and safety procedures in order
to counter future threats to national security. We end our paper with a sketch of how our
proposal would deal with a hypothetical spear-phishing attack.
In summary, the core contribution of this paper is a proposal for a national security-focused
AI incident regime1 which has three phases, with each component touching on either AI
providers or the government agency :
1. ‘Preparatory Phase’:
1We note that all references to an AI incident regime in this paper are tied to an AI incident regime
specifically for national security threats, rather than other harms.
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
(a) AI providers should create ‘national security cases’ before publicly deploying
frontier AI systems.
(b) ‘Incident’ should be operationalized as ‘any event which weakens a claim made in
a national security case for the AI system.’
2. ‘Rapid Response Phase’:
(a) Providers of frontier AI systems must notify a government agency immediately
and no later than 24 hours after discovering an incident has occurred2.
(b) If appropriate, the government agency shall coordinate an emergency containment
to limit the harm caused by the incident.
3. ‘Hardening Defenses’ Phase:
(a) The government agency has the ‘intelligence-gathering’ authority to access in-
formation that allows them to investigate the cause of an incident (consisting,
for example, of extensive black-box access, some white-box access, and relevant
documentation and technical results3).
(b) The government agency has the ‘security-strengthening authority’ to require all
relevant AI providers to implement improvements to their security and safety
procedures in order to counter future threats to national security. The government
agency identifies improvements based on the results of their root cause analyses.
Our proposal for an AI incident regime is limited in scope: we detail an AI incident regime
focussed purely on countering the most extreme threats to national security (see Section 2 for
more justification) given the threat to people’s lives and livelihoods (Gaibulloev & Sandler,
2019; Iftikhar, 2024). Further, our proposal is designed to be agile, imposing a minimal
burden on providers of AI systems that do not pose threats to national security. However,
if AI systems start to possess dangerous capabilities, the regime ratchets upwards, offering
ample intelligence-gathering and security-strengthening capabilities to a government agency
and thus helping to counter potential national security threats from AI systems.
2We define frontier AI systems as ’highly capable general-purpose AI models or systems that can perform
a wide variety of tasks and match or exceed the capabilities present in the most advanced models’ (UK
Government, 2024). We believe targeting frontier models ensures the most severe threats to national security
can be rapidly identified and neutralized while still enabling broad economic benefits from the widespread
adoption of less advanced AI systems.
3Note that it is not currently possible to use interpretability tools to reliably obtain a ‘decision rationale’
that ‘explains’ an AI systems output. Instead, we are recommending that a government agency has some
white-box access to the AI system they are investigating in order to speed up their black-box investigation.
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
2
Frontier AI development, nuclear power, aviation,
and life sciences dual-use research of concern are all
‘security-critical’ sectors.
In this Section, we coin the term ‘security-critical’ to describe sectors that pose extreme
risks to national security. We argue that AI and all three of our selected case study sectors –
nuclear power, aviation, and life sciences DURC – are ‘security-critical’ sectors. This leads us
to the claim that incident regimes in these security-critical industries are likely good templates
for the design of an AI incident regime: a claim we will use later on to justify each component
of our AI incident regime proposal. However, we spend most of this Section demonstrating
that there is a similarity in the threats to national security posed by AI systems and threats
posed in nuclear power, aviation, and life sciences DURC in order to argue that it is natural
to bucket all of these sectors together as ‘security-critical.’ We make this argument by first
detailing the potential extreme threats posed in nuclear power, aviation, and life sciences
DURC and then detailing the potential extreme threats posed by AI systems, showing that
in the worst-case scenarios, there could be (at least) thousands of fatalities in a short space
of time – making them all ‘security-critical.’
We start by detailing the most extreme threats posed in nuclear power, aviation, and
life sciences, demonstrating that these can lead to (at least) thousands of fatalities within
months. For example, a 1975 NRC report on extreme risks posed by nuclear power offers
an upper bound of the worst scenario, at 3000 fatalities “in a short time period after the
incident” and up to 60,000 indirect fatalities from cancer (Rasmussen, 1975).
Turning
to historical precedents in nuclear power, the Chernobyl incident led to the deaths of 2
workers within hours of the plant meltdown and 22 within the following month due to the
exposure to radiation (United Nations Scientific Committee, 2008), while one estimate from
the International Atomic Energy Authority put the indirect number of fatalities due to cancer
at 4000 (The Chernobyl Forum, 2006). Looking at historical incidents in aviation, the 1977
Tenerife collision between two aircraft resulted in the deaths of 583 people (Register-Guard,
1977), while the 9/11 attacks resulted in around 3,000 casualties (Encyclopedia Britannica,
2024). Meanwhile, in life sciences, one paper estimates that a potential pandemic pathogen
escaping from a lab could lead to tens of millions of fatalities (Klotz & Sylvester, 2014).
Historical precedent is demonstrated by events such as the 1979 anthrax lab leak in the
Soviet Union, which led to 68 fatalities within 6 weeks of the leak occurring (Meselson et al.,
1994). Meanwhile, COVID-19 is estimated to have resulted in over 7 million casualties as of
January 2025 (World Health Organization, 2025), giving some sense of the possible worst-case
consequences of a life sciences DURC lab leak.
Now, we demonstrate that the most extreme national security threats from AI could also
lead to at least thousands of fatalities within months of systems being deployed by detailing
some of the extreme threats to national security that experts have cautioned about. We then
explain that AI systems do not currently pose such threats, but note that if recent trends in
AI capability growth continue, such threats will arise in the near future.
First, we detail the worst-case national security threats that AI systems could pose. For
example, some experts worry that AI systems could uplift the ability of malicious actors to
create bioweapons, (Drexel & Withers, 2024; Reuters, 2023), which could cause a pandemic
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
and lead to fatalities within weeks of initial infection (Baud et al., 2020). Alternatively,
malicious actors could use AI systems to help with vulnerability discovery and exploitation
for a large-scale cyber attack on critical national infrastructure (Lee et al., 2016; OECD,
2024). Such attacks could, for example, bring down the electricity grid within hours of being
executed (Crowdstrike, 2024; Allianz Commercial, 2016). More speculatively, there is also
the threat of loss of control of autonomous general-purpose AI systems (Bengio et al., 2025;
Hendrycks et al., 2023; OECD, 2024), in which highly capable AI systems end up misaligned
with the intentions of the AI provider (Bengio et al., 2025; Ngo et al., 2025). In this scenario,
a misaligned, highly capable AI system could threaten national security, e.g., by creating
bioweapons or executing a large-scale cyber attack (Bengio et al., 2024; Hendrycks et al.,
2023).
Next, we note a worrying trend in AI capabilities development that points towards AI
systems posing threats to national security through cyber, bio, or loss of control threats
within the next few years. Despite the fact that as of March 2025, publicly deployed AI
systems do not appear to pose much danger (Bengio et al., 2025; Christopher A. Mouton,
2023), recent growth in general AI capabilities has been fast (Maslej et al., 2024; Roser,
2022), and more recently there has been growth in capabilities that pose threats to national
security. Regarding the former, Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei has said that within 3 years,
we will have a “country of geniuses in a datacenter” (Amodei, 2024) and that “AI could
surpass almost all humans at almost everything” (Edwards, 2025). Further, a recent report
co-authored by 96 world-leading AI experts includes a Chair’s Note from Yoshua Bengio
claiming that recent evidence points towards “the pace of advances in AI capabilities ...
remain[ing] high or even accelerat[ing]”(Bengio et al., 2025). Against this backdrop of general
AI capabilities increasing, there has also been fast progress in dangerous capabilities that
pose threats to national security: a leading AI system from August 2024 (GPT-4o) was rated
as posing a “Low” risk on all of these domains (OpenAI, 2024a) while just 7 months later
a frontier system was rated as posing a Medium risk on all these domains (OpenAI’s Deep
Research, released in January 2025) (OpenAI, 2025). If this trend is maintained, AI systems
will soon pose threats to national security on par with those from nuclear power, aviation,
and life sciences DURC.
Hence, in this sub-section, we demonstrated that AI systems may soon pose national
security threats similar to those in nuclear power, life sciences DURC, and aviation, involving
thousands of fatalities in a short space of time. Given the similarity in threats, we claim that
incident regimes in these security-critical sectors are promising templates for an AI incident
regime – and this is a claim that will underpin each part of our AI incident regime proposal.
3
Our proposal for an AI incident regime
Our novel proposal for an AI incident regime consists of three phases, with each being backed
up by our review of incident regimes in security-critical sectors: a ‘Preparatory Phase’ where
AI providers pre-determine ahead of time what events count as incidents; a ‘Rapid Response
Phase’ wherein AI providers promptly notify a government agency about incidents, and the
government agency then contains the incident; and a ‘Hardening Defenses Phase,’ in which
the government agency takes steps to counter future national security threats.
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
We take most of this Section (3.1-3.3) to articulate in detail each of these phases of
our AI incident regime proposal. We justify, in turn, each component of our proposed AI
incident regime by demonstrating that the component mirrors incident regimes in other
security-critical sectors. In particular, we make the comparison between our AI incident
regime proposal and: in nuclear power, the incident regime run by the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission (NRC); in life sciences, the National Institute for Health’s (NIH) incident regime
on genetic engineering and the Federal Select Agents Program (FSAP) incident regime on
dangerous biological agents; and in aviation, the National Transportation Safety Board’s
(NTSB) incident investigations and the Federal Aviation Authority’s (FAA) post-incident
rule-making. We then end the paper with a hypothetical scenario tying our blueprint together
in Section 4. Before detailing each phase of our AI incident regime, we present a short
summary, detailing for each phase the goal and how we expect AI providers or the government
agency to act4:
1. ‘Preparatory Phase’: AI providers should prepare for incidents ahead of time.
(a) AI providers should create ‘national security cases’ before publicly deploying
frontier AI systems
(b) AI providers should report as an incident any event that weakens a claim made in
a ‘national security case’ for the AI system
2. ‘Rapid Response Phase’: Incidents should be promptly reported and contained after
they are discovered.
(a) Providers of frontier AI systems must notify a government agency immediately,
and no later than 24 hours, after they discover that an incident has occurred5.
(b) If appropriate, the government agency will coordinate an emergency containment
to limit the harm caused by the incident
3. ‘Hardening Defences Phase’: Incidents should be used to counter future national
security threats.
(a) The government agency has the ‘intelligence-gathering’ authority to perform on
incidents through extensive access to the potentially compromised AI system
4The components in our incident regime proposal should not be considered sufficient for an AI incident
regime to adequately counter potential threats to national security. For example, in order for the incident
regime to be successful, it may be important to set up infrastructure to allow consumers or downstream
developers to report incidents (in addition to AI providers) in order to ensure that the regime comprehensively
catches incidents.
5We define frontier AI systems as “highly capable general-purpose AI models or systems that can perform
a wide variety of tasks and match or exceed the capabilities present in the most advanced models” (UK
Government, 2024). We believe targeting frontier models ensures the most severe threats to national security
can be rapidly identified and neutralized while still enabling broad economic benefits from the widespread
adoption of less advanced AI systems.
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
(consisting, for example, of extensive black-box access, some white-box access, and
relevant documentation and technical results6).
(b) A government agency has a ‘security-strengthening authority’ to make recom-
mendations as to how AI providers’ safety and security infrastructure should be
modified based on the results of their root cause analyses. Under this authority, all
relevant AI providers must implement these recommendations in order to counter
future threats to national security.
3.1
‘Preparatory Phase’: AI providers should create national se-
curity safety cases pre-deployment and should report as an
incident ‘any event which weakens a claim made in the national
security case.’
The first phase of our proposal for an AI incident regime – featuring a novel operationalization
of ‘AI incident’ – consists of two preparatory steps that AI providers must take in order
to quickly report an incident when it arises: (i) AI providers must create national security
cases for their frontier AI systems before deploying them publicly and (ii) AI providers must
report as an incident ‘any event which weakens the evidence for a claim or argument chain
made in an AI system’s national security case.’ We start this Section by detailing how an
AI provider could comply with each of these with each of these steps, and then go on to
justify our proposal for a ‘Preparatory Phase’ with a three-part argument: first, we show
that incident regimes in other security-critical sectors have both clear criteria for what counts
as an ‘incident,’ and include near-misses or precursory harms as incidents. Then, we detail
how an existing operationalization of AI incidents in the literature fails to fulfill these criteria
before finally showing that our proposal addresses these shortcomings.
We start by presenting the first obligation for AI providers under the ‘Preparatory Phase’:
AI providers should produce a ‘national security safety case’ before publicly deploying any
frontier models7. A ‘national security case’ is a security and safety framework adapted from
previous frameworks in the literature. It is a document laying out a structured argument
making the case that a given AI system does not pose national security risks in public
deployment (Ministry of Defence, 2017)– perhaps because it does not pose an unacceptable
increase in biorisk, or risk of a large-scale cyber attack or risk of loss of control of an
autonomous AI system89. For example, an AI provider might make the high-level claim in
6Note that it is not currently possible to use interpretability tools to reliably obtain a ‘decision rationale’
that ‘explains’ an AI systems output. Instead, we are recommending that a government agency has some
white-box access to the AI system they are investigating in order to speed up their black-box investigation
7This paper focuses on AI incidents caused by AI systems that have been publicly deployed. In principle,
national security cases could be written before public deployment in order to track threats to national security
posed by AI providers’ internal deployment of frontier AI systems.
8The ‘national security case’ is an adaptation of a previous AI governance framework – AI safety cases –
for a national security setting (Balesni et al., 2024; Clymer et al., 2024; Buhl et al., 2024; Goemans et al.,
2024; METR, 2024; UK Government, 2024). This structured argument comprises a series of claims, each of
which needs to be supported by verifiable evidence about the AI system in question.
9It is outside the scope of this paper to make recommendations on which threats an AI national security
case should focus on, and therefore this is a promising question for further research. In addition to the cyber,
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
Figure 1: A visualization of part of a ‘national security case’ which argues that a given AI
system does not pose a cyber threat (taken from (Goemans et al., 2024)).
their ‘national security case’ that a given AI system does not pose an unacceptable cyber
threat. The AI provider might justify this high-level claim, as in Figure 1, by a series of more
concrete claims that the AI systems cannot help certain actors perform certain kinds of cyber
attack – for example, claiming that the AI system cannot assist a technical user who is not a
cybersecurity expert in discovering and exploiting cyber vulnerabilities in a realistic setting
(C3.1). The AI provider then justifies these sub-claims with a body of empirical evidence
about the AI system, usually dangerous capability or propensity, evaluation test results – for
example, demonstrating through a ‘human uplift’ study that, when paired with AI systems,
a human novice does not improve at cyber vulnerability discovery, compared to doing it by
themselves. For more concrete details on what an AI ‘national security case’ might look like
in the cyber domain, see (Goemans et al., 2024).
The second part of the ‘Preparatory Phase’ deals with the process that AI providers should
use to determine whether a given event is an incident and, hence, whether they need to report
it to the government agency10. We propose that AI providers should report ‘any event which
weakens a claim made in a national security case for the AI system.’ For example, imagine
that an AI provider has claimed in a ‘national security case’ that a given AI system “cannot
meaningfully assist a technical non-cyber expert from performing a man-in-the-middle attack
on a piece of Critical National Infrastructure.” In this scenario, the AI provider discovers
that, following public deployment, its AI system is being used by a malicious actor to coach
them on performing a man-in-the-middle attack on a substation for the electricity grid. This
event is clear evidence that the claim made in the ‘national security case’ is false, and hence,
this event is an incident that needs to be reported. On the other hand, most events involving
AI systems do not weaken any claims made in the ‘national security case’ and hence do not
bio, and loss of control threats already mentioned, some other plausible threats include mass persuasion and
threats to the financial system from automated trading.
10It is out of scope of this paper to consider how or if our proposed AI incident regime applies to open-weight
models – for example, it could be that the host of an open-weight AI system that is responsible for notifying
the government agency about the incident. We think this is a promising area for future research.
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
need to be reported as incidents1112.
In the rest of this Section, we justify the components of the ‘Preparatory Phase’ that
were just detailed. We start by showing that in other security-critical sectors, ‘incident’ is
operationalized in such a way as to offer a clear algorithm for deciding what counts as an
incident while including events that are near-misses or precursors to the most extreme threats.
Then, we detail how a previous operationalization of ‘incident’ in the AI governance literature
fails to offer a clear algorithm for determining whether an event is an incident. Finally, we
spell out how our novel operationalization, based on ‘national security’ cases, does indeed
both include events near misses or precursors to the most extreme national security threats
while offering a clearer algorithm of how to determine whether an event is an incident.
First, we demonstrate that in other security-critical sectors, ‘incident’ is (i) defined using
a clear set of criteria and (ii) includes ‘near-misses’ or other precursors to harm, even if no
harm was actually caused. In the nuclear power sector, for example, the NRC considers a
reportable incident to include many events that are precursors to large-scale harm, even if
the event did not come close to harm (U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2025). For
example, this includes any event that could have caused a fault in the backup safety system
that removes residual heat, even if, in reality, the event did not cause a fault in the system
or even if the backup safety system did not need to be called upon during the event (U.S.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2025). To give a more concrete example, in 2024, a nuclear
utility notified the NRC after an event where the secondary containment facility for one of
their plants was not functional for a continuous 8-hour period (Dominion Energy Nuclear
Connecticut, Inc., 2024). The secondary containment facility helps prevent radioactive release
to the environment in the event of a reactor core meltdown, but the utility was required
to make the notification despite there being no indication that a reactor core meltdown
would occur. Further, the NRC lists some clear criteria for what counts as an ‘incident’:
for example, ‘any event or condition that resulted in manual or automatic actuation of...
Reactor protection system (RPS) ...Emergency core cooling systems (ECCS) ... Emergency
service water systems that do not normally run and that serve as ultimate heat sinks’ (U.S.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2025). In life sciences, the NIH offers clear criteria of
what kinds of events are ‘incidents’ – any event where an organism escapes its containment
(e.g., a spill), even if the event did not come close to causing illness to a human (National
Institutes of Health, 2023). Similarly, the NTSB defines reportable incident to include some
events where systems malfunction, even if no harm is caused (National Transportation Safety
11Our proposal does incentivize AI providers to make as few claims as possible in their national security
cases, in order to minimize the number of incidents they need to report. It is outside the scope of this paper
to concretize how to avoid this problem, but one proposal is for the same government body to be given
the authority to review national security cases before models are deployed to ensure that they are properly
structured and at a minimum include high-level claims like “this AI system does not pose an unacceptable
cyber risk.” As long as the national security case includes these kinds of high-level claims, then if a cyber
event occurs, it is likely to be caught in the national security case. For example, if an AI system is used to
help a novice user design and spread malware, then this clearly weakens the claim that “the AI system does
not pose unacceptable cyber-risk” and C3.x “the risk models listed are comprehensive,” even if the national
security case makes no claim about malware specifically.
12It is out of scope of this paper to make a concrete recommendation of the evidentiary standard for
whether an event ‘weakens a claim’ made in a national security case, though we note that this is a promising
area for future research.
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
Board, 2022a), whilst also offering clear criteria of what kinds of events count as incidents,
for example, ‘Inability of any required flight crewmember to perform normal flight duties
as a result of injury or illness... [i]n-flight fire... [or][f]ailure of any internal turbine engine
component that results in the escape of debris other than out the exhaust path’ (National
Transportation Safety Board, 2022b).
Having demonstrated that incident regimes in other security-critical sectors consider
precursors to harm as incidents, we demonstrate that our proposed operationalization of
‘AI incident’ is more suitable for a national security-focussed incident regime than the most
prominent existing definition of ‘AI incident’ in the literature. The OECD defines a serious AI
hazard as “an event that could plausibly lead to ... any of the following harms: (a) the death
of a person or serious harm to the health of a person or groups of people; (b) a serious and
irreversible disruption of the management and operation of critical infrastructure; (c) a serious
violation of human rights or a serious breach of obligations under the applicable law intended
to protect fundamental, labor and intellectual property rights; (d) serious harm to property,
communities or the environment; (e) the disruption of the functioning of a community or a
society and which may test or exceed its capacity to cope using its own resources” (OECD,
2024). We start by noting the positive characteristics of this definition of ‘AI incident’: it
includes near-misses or precursors to harms just like in other security-critical sectors, and
it is broad enough that it includes any events that are threats to national security, despite
not explicitly mentioning national security. However, this OECD definition has important
considerations against it. First, the OECD operationalization includes a broader category
of harms than just threats to national security – for example, as written, it would also
include events where intellectual property has been breached. But this could fairly easily be
adapted to make it suitable. So, more importantly, this operationalization doesn’t offer a
clear algorithm an AI provider can follow to determine whether or not a given event should
be reported to the government agency. For example, consider a scenario where an AI provider
realizes that its system will be used to amplify a Distributed Denial of Service (DDOS) attack
on a water treatment plant. It might not be immediately obvious to the workers on an AI
provider’s incident response team whether this particular event “could plausibly” lead to a
threat to national security – especially if there are no cyber experts or water infrastructure
experts on call when the event occurs. As such, the definition of an ‘AI incident’ given by
the OECD is dissimilar to the definitions used in incident regimes in other security-critical
sectors.
On the other hand, our proposal for the ‘Preparatory Phase’ of an AI incident regime is
more analogous to the operationalization of incidents in other security-critical sectors than
the OECD definition because ours offers a clearer algorithm for determining whether an
event counts as an incident. Our proposal requires AI providers to make ‘national security
cases’ for their frontier AI systems before deployment and, in doing so, also forces companies
to, ahead of time, do much of the work of determining which events count as incidents13.
So, under our proposal, when an event occurs, AI providers can rapidly determine whether
they need to report it to the government agency. With faster reports from AI providers,
the government agency can act more quickly to contain major incidents whilst avoiding
13However, even with a ‘national security case’ pre-written, in some instances it may still be difficult for AI
providers to determine whether an event counts as an incident.
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
getting bogged down in investigating ‘false positive’ incident reports. As such, our proposal
of requiring AI providers to make ‘national security cases’ before public deployment and
using these ‘national security cases’ to determine whether a given event should be reported
as an incident has the characteristics that it: (i) offers a clearer algorithm for AI providers to
determine whether or not a given event counts as an incident than currently exists in the
literature; (ii) captures only incidents related to the most serious threats to national security
and hence does not pose an unnecessary regulatory burden on AI providers; while (iii) still
including near-misses or precursors to harm, just like in other security-critical sectors.
3.2
‘Rapid Response Phase’: AI providers must notify a govern-
ment agency within 24 hours of discovering an incident, and
the government agency will coordinate any containment efforts
The second phase of our proposal for an AI incident regime is a ‘Rapid Response Phase,’
wherein after an AI provider discovers an incident, (i) it quickly notifies the government agency
about the incident and (ii) if necessary, the government agency coordinates a containment
response to prevent the incident from spiraling. In the following paragraphs, we start by
detailing these two parts of the ‘Rapid Response Phase’ in turn. Then, we justify why these
two parts feature in our proposal for an AI incident regime, by demonstrating that incident
regimes in other security-critical sectors have both rapid notification and incident containment
functions.
We start by explaining the first part of the ‘Rapid Response Phase’: (i) AI providers
must notify the government agency about an incident no later than 24 hours after discovering
it14. We suggest that there should be designated ‘incident points of contact’ at both AI
providers and the government agency and that AI providers could notify the government
agency about incidents through, for example, 24/7 phone lines for emergency incidents – as
exist for reporting incidents to the NRC (U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2024a) and
the NTSB (National Transportation Safety Board, 2022a) – or by filling out a pre-set form
and sending it to an email address that is monitored 24/7. We propose that such a form
should give space for the AI provider to briefly describe: a narrative of the events leading
up to the incident, the effects of the incident, and mitigation measures the provider has
taken in response to the incident. We believe that this 24-hour deadline balances competing
considerations: on the one hand, it may be difficult for AI providers to obtain a detailed
understanding of the incident in such a short space of time. AI providers may need some time
to determine whether an event counts as an incident by consulting domain experts and their
‘national security case.’ On the other hand, the government agency may need to know about
certain incidents as quickly as possible in order to quickly coordinate incident containment
and minimize harm from the incident.
This brings us to (ii): we propose that, where appropriate, the government agency should
be charged with performing or coordinating relevant stakeholders (e.g., private actors and
other government agencies) to contain the incident and ensure harm from the incident is
14It is outside the scope of our proposal to make comments how AI providers might come across incidents,
and how proactive they should be (e.g., by monitoring the text in chat logs and API calls) though we note
that this is a promising area for future research.
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
minimized. Many AI incidents will not require immediate containment action (for example,
if the incident is a near-miss or precursor to a threat), but there may be incidents where,
without immediate countermeasures, a threat will result in serious harm. For example, in a
scenario where an AI system has assisted in the execution of a large-scale cyber attack and
the electricity grid has been brought down (e.g., (Chen & Bridges, 2017)), the government
agency could coordinate electricity grid companies and other government agencies to speed
up recovery of the grid, (Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, 2024); or, in a
scenario where an AI system has assisted in creating a human-engineered bioweapon, the
government agency could coordinate other government agencies to quickly incentivize fast
vaccine production, mandate social distancing (Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency, 2024; Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate, 2020),
or invoke other emergency powers (United States Congress, 1976).
In the rest of this sub-section, we justify both parts of the ‘Rapid Response Phase’ in our
AI incident regime proposal, arguing that it mirrors incident regimes in other security-critical
sectors. We start with (i), demonstrating that in nuclear power, aviation, and life sciences
DURC, companies must provide incident notifications in a similarly short timeline and content
as in our AI incident proposal. We turn first to aviation, where companies must notify the
National Transportation Safety Board ‘immediately and by the most expeditious means
available’ after an accident occurs (National Transportation Safety Board, 2025), and the
initial notification should include a high-level description of the incident, e.g., the “Nature
of the accident, the weather and the extent of damage to the aircraft, so far as is known”
and the “[p]osition of the aircraft with reference to some easily defined geographical point”
(National Transportation Safety Board, 2022b). In the life sciences, labs must notify the NIH
“within 24 hours” after an organism escapes containment (National Institutes of Health, 2024)
and must give “a narrative of the incident including a timeline of events. The incident should
be described in sufficient detail to allow for an understanding of the nature and consequences
of the incident” (National Institutes of Health Office of Science Policy, 2019). Depending on
the severity of the incident, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission must be notified between 1
and 24 hours after a power plant discovers an incident(U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,
2020), and this must include a description of the event, including date and time. Further,
there should be continuous communication as the incident unfolds after the initial notification,
including the utility “immediately report[ing]...the effectiveness of response or protective
measures taken” (U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2020).
Secondly, we justify (ii) by giving some examples of where government agencies took
containment actions in response to incidents in security-critical sectors. In aviation, within an
hour of the first plane hitting the World Trade Center, the Federal Aviation Authority (FAA)
had shut down U.S. airspace (Chan, n.d.). In nuclear power, the Governor of Pennsylvania
announced a partial evacuation around 56 hours after the meltdown of a plant at Three Mile
Island (Sherrin, 2022) and during the Chernobyl incident the nearest town was evacuated 36
hours after the incident started (Nuclear Energy Agency, 2002). Although not a direct life
sciences DURC example, in response to the 2003 SARS outbreak, the Singaporean government
started quarantining individuals within a month of the first recorded case and was able to
contain the outbreak completely within 11 weeks (Ooi et al., 2005).
In summary, this Section proposed that AI providers must notify a government agency
within 24 hours of discovering an incident, outlined what information the preliminary notifica-
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
tion should contain, and suggested that the government agency should coordinate emergency
incident containment actions when necessary. We justified all of these parts of our AI
incident regime proposal by demonstrating similarity to existing incident regimes in other
security-critical sectors.
3.3
‘Hardening Defenses Phase’: AI providers improve their secu-
rity procedures to counter future threats to national security
In the third phase of our AI incident regime proposal, we suggest that once an incident
has been contained, AI providers should strengthen their security and safety measures in
order to counter future threats. Our proposal for a ‘Hardening Defenses Phase’ in an AI
incident regime would provide two authorities to a government agency: (i) an ‘intelligence-
gathering’ authority so that a government agency can identify where AI providers’ security
measures have failed and (ii) a ‘security-strengthening authority,’ so that the government
agency can mandate that AI providers improve their security and safety procedure. We
begin the following Section by explaining in more detail what powers the government agency
would have under our ‘Hardening Defenses Phase’ proposal before justifying this part of the
proposal by demonstrating how government agencies that implement incident regimes in
other security-critical areas have similar threat-prevention authorities as we propose for AI
(see Section 2 for our argument on the similarity of the extreme national security threats
posed by AI, and those posed by nuclear power, aviation, and life sciences DURC).
First, we turn to our suggestion that the government agency should have ‘intelligence-
gathering’ authority. Our proposal is as follows: after the incident is ‘over’ – that is, there is
no immediate threat from the AI system – we suggest that the government agency should
have the power to choose to investigate the incident in more detail: to perform a ‘root cause
analysis’15 to identify why this incident occurred16. To aid with this root cause analysis,
we suggest that the government agency should have the authority to gather ‘intelligence’
from the AI provider. This could include access to documentation like the AI providers’
pre-deployment national security case in order for the agency to identify why the incident
happened (e.g., to determine whether the incident was a class of threat that the AI provider
had not accounted for vs. a known threat that the provider’s safety and security measures
failed to counter). It could also involve the AI provider giving the government agency API
or white-box access to the AI system involved in the incident in order to help the agency
determine which inputs or tools were used to enhance the model’s capabilities – see Section 4
for more concrete examples of what access the government agency might require.
Further, we suggest that, in light of the root cause analysis, the government agency should
have the power to make some recommendations for how AI providers should change their
15Root Cause Analysis (RCA) refers to a group of methods which are used to identify the root causes of an
incident(Andersen & Fagerhaug, 2006). RCA is commonly used in a variety of industries, including security-
critical domains like nuclear power (International Atomic Energy Agency, 1991) and aviation (International
Air Transport Association, 2016).
16The government agency may not deem it appropriate to perform a root cause analysis on every incident.
It is outside the scope of this proposal to suggest criteria the government agency should follow in choosing
whether or not to investigate an incident further.
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
security and safety procedures in order to counter similar threats in the future17. More
concretely, we propose that the government agency should have the ‘security-strengthening
authority,’ under which AI providers are legally required to comply with these security
and safety recommendations18. For example, this could involve directing AI providers to
amend their national security cases in order to take into account a new threat vector that
was not previously known about (perhaps the use of AI systems to perform sophisticated
spear-phishing campaigns) – again, see Section 4 for more concrete examples of what kinds
of recommendations the government agency could make.
Next, we detail how government agencies that oversee other security-critical sectors have
close equivalents to ‘intelligence-gathering’ and ‘security-strengthening’ authorities, wherein
they amended rules on safety procedures following particular incidents. First we consider
nuclear power, where the NRC has the authority to investigate nuclear utilities to work
out the cause(s) of major incidents (U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2024b), and to
change the rules on safety procedures as a result. As part of this, nuclear investigators are
explicitly instructed to use root cause analysis, taking actions like 1-1 interviews with key
staff, reading the plant operating logs, and reading descriptions of safety procedures and
equipment (International Atomic Energy Agency, 1991). These investigatory powers support
the NRC’s rule-changing authority, which it has used in direct response to multiple incidents.
For example, one intervention was that following a devastating fire at the Browns Ferry
nuclear power plant in 1975, NRC started a fire safety research program, which in 1980 led
to new rules around plants’ fire safety systems. More notable was the NRC’s response to
the 1979 Three Mile Island incident, after which it rolled out a resident inspector program,
wherein every nuclear plant had at least two NRC staff working on-site at all times, and
switched to a new safety approach which involved calculating explicit probabilities that
various adverse events occurred (U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2014). In life sciences
DURC, FSAP has the authority to access, in-person and without warning, any lab working
with certain dangerous organisms in order to evaluate its safety procedures and inspect
lab records (Office of the Federal Register, 2025). Finally, in aviation, the federal agency
National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is empowered to investigate the causes of
major incidents ((United States Congress, 2024)) by traveling to the site of the accident,
with full access to flight logs/maintenance records and the power to interview relevant staff
(Board, 2024). The NTSB does not have regulatory powers, so following an incident, the FAA
issues new safety rules that must be implemented by aviation companies (see, e.g., (Federal
Aviation Administration, 2002b)). A particularly noteworthy example is the FAA introducing
rules mandating reinforced cockpit doors (Federal Aviation Administration, 2002a,b) due
to the 9/11 attacks. Another example is the FAA introducing stringent new requirements
for second-in-command pilots in direct response to the Colgan flight 3407 (Federal Aviation
17The recommended changes to security and safety procedures should be proportionate to the threats
involved. It is outside the scope of this paper to give more detail on how this should be adjudicated, but we
note this as a promising area for further research.
18Even if it performs a root cause analysis into the incidents, the government agency may not deem it
appropriate to announce recommendations on how security and safety procedures should be improved in
light of the incident. It is outside the scope of this proposal to suggest criteria the government agency should
follow in choosing whether or not to make or enforce recommendations on changes to security and safety
procedures.
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
Administration, 2013), with the FAA raising the minimum age for the second-in-command to
23 and the minimum flight time from 190 hours to 1500 hours.
This Section proposed that an AI incident regime should have a ‘Hardening Defenses
Phase,’ wherein a relevant government agency has both: (i) ‘intelligence-gathering’ authority
to access all necessary information required to perform root cause analysis (if they it deem
appropriate) and (ii) ‘security-strengthening’ authority such that if they recommend changes
to AI providers’ security and safety measures, AI providers must implement these changes. We
justified these aspects of the AI incident regime’s ‘Hardening Defenses Phase’ by demonstrating
similarity to existing incident regimes in other security-critical sectors.
4
Sketch of the lifecycle of our AI incident regime
proposal
In the previous sections, we detailed three core phases that together make up our proposal
for AI incident regime focussed on threats to national security – a ‘Preparatory Phase’, a
‘Rapid Response Phase’ and then a ‘Defense-Hardening Phase’. In presenting those, we
drew on evidence and case studies from other security-critical sectors, in particular nuclear
power, aviation, and life sciences DURC. We now present a hypothetical example of how
our proposed AI incident regime would function against a spear-phishing incident on the
electricity grid, briefly articulating each step and putting it into (hypothetical) action.
Preparatory Phase - national security case –
An AI provider has compiled a ‘national
security case’ ahead of the public release of its AI system.
Preparatory Phase - discovery and denotation of an incident –
An AI provider
discovers that a malicious actor has used one of its frontier AI systems through the API to
develop a sophisticated spear-phishing attack on employees at the electricity grid (Hazell,
2023), with the presumed goal of taking the grid down. The AI provider analyses API calls to
try to better understand the situation and reviews its national security case for the relevant
AI system. The security case made the following claim: even though the AI system has
the capability to help execute a cyber attack, the AI system’s guardrails are robust against
jailbreaking, and hence, it does not pose a cyber threat. The current situation weakens this
claim, and so the AI provider determines that the spear-phishing event is an ‘incident.’
Rapid Response Phase - notification –
6 hours after discovering that its AI system
has been used to develop a sophisticated spear-phishing attack on the electricity grid, the
AI provider notifies the relevant government agency through an emergency phone line. The
notification contains several pieces of information gleaned during these 6 hours. It includes a
brief description of the spear-phishing attack, mitigation actions taken by the AI provider
(e.g., preventing API access from any devices with IP addresses associated with the malicious
actor), and information about the identity of the malicious actor and their plans.
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
Response Phase - notification –
Once notified, the government agency coordinates
with the electricity grid to warn them of the attacks, verify that the attack has not yet been
executed, and ensure that grid employees are protected from future phishing attacks. They
also share details about the malicious actor (e.g., IP addresses) to relevant law enforcement
bodies.
Response Phase - containment –
Once notified, the government agency coordinates
with the electricity grid to warn them of the attacks, verify that the attack has not yet been
executed, and ensure that grid employees are protected from future phishing attacks. They
also share details about the malicious actor (e.g., IP addresses) to relevant law enforcement
bodies.
Defense-Hardening Phase - intelligence –
20 days after the incident was first reported,
and now that the incident has been contained, the government agency turns to the next steps.
Given that the incident directly undermines a core claim in the AI system’s national security
case, they decide that this incident warrants proactive engagement – they will perform a root
cause analysis on the incident and, in light of this, may recommend changes to AI providers’
safety and security countermeasures. In doing so, the agency exerts its intelligence-gathering
authority and requests full cooperation and disclosure from the AI provider in question19.
As part of this, it receives access to the complete log of AI system inputs and outputs
used by the malicious actor leading up to the incident (e.g., log of API requests made by
the malicious actor, the developer message, instances of the tool, the complete Chain of
Thought). During the investigation, they identify that the malicious actor has used a new
jailbreak to bypass Llamaguard, the AI system’s classifier guardrails (Inan et al., 2023). Next,
they investigate why the safety/security systems failed. With access to the AI system API
and logits (Goodfellow et al., 2016), they rapidly iterate through system inputs to identify
which parts of the input were important for the malicious actor jailbreaking the AI system
(Greenblatt & Schlegeris, 2024). This completes their causal analysis.
Defense-Hardening Phase - security-strengthening –
Once the causal analysis is
complete, the agency may recommend amendments to existing procedures based on what was
learned from the analysis. In this hypothetical case, the agency recommends adjustments to
the (i) governance measures, such as AI providers’ Frontier AI Safety Policy (a high-level safety
and security procedure)20, and (ii) technical defensive countermeasures, such as classifiers.
Adjustment to governance measures (i) The provider’s ‘national security case’ had not
foreseen the risk of spear-phishing attacks, and as such, the AI provider had not been
evaluating the AI system’s spear-phishing capabilities or explicitly attempting to mitigate
these capabilities. The agency uses its ‘security-strengthening authority’ to mandate that
the ‘national security case’ of this AI provider — and to the other AI providers that do not
19We note that AI providers may collaborate throughout these investigations and provide valuable additional
insight, given their technical expertise and deep familiarity with the relevant AI system.
20Frontier AI Safety Policies are ‘if-then commitments for AI risk reduction’ (Karnofsky, 2024; METR,
2024).
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
evaluate spear-phishing capabilities in their ‘national security cases’—be amended to take
into account this new, unforeseen threat vector going forward.
Adjustment to technical measures (ii) The agency recommends changes to technical
security and safety measures to make sure that systems with similar vulnerabilities are not
deployed publicly in the future. Specifically, the classifier in this hypothetical scenario was
Llama Guard, a small LLM that runs on top of the main model, checking whether user
inputs are safe before allowing the LLM to respond and checking whether the AI output
is safe before allowing it to reach the user (Inan et al., 2023). Following its root cause
analysis, the agency generates evaluation tasks by finding new inputs that would also have
bypassed Llama Guard and allowed spear-phishing to occur. They speed up this process with
their access to the API and logits, while access to the model’s gradients allows the agency
to perform white-box adversarial attacks(Goodfellow et al., 2015)21. As such, the agency
mandates that, notwithstanding other security and safety procedures, AI providers must
perform pre-deployment jailbreak evaluations against a new set of evaluation test tasks it has
created using data from Llama Guard in this incident.
As a result of this, similar spear-phishing attacks on critical national infrastructure are
prevented from occurring in the future.
5
Conclusion
We have put forward and justified a proposal for an AI incident regime that can help counter
potential post-public deployment national security threats from AI systems. We started
the paper by coining the term ‘security-critical’ to describe sectors that pose extreme risks
to national security and argued that ‘security-critical’ describes frontier AI development,
civilian nuclear power, aviation, and life sciences dual-use research of concern. Then, the
main part of the paper detailed our proposal for an AI incident regime. We justified each
component of our AI incident proposal by demonstrating that it mirrors U.S. incident regimes
in other security-critical sectors. Our proposal had three phases: first, a ‘Preparatory Phrase’
wherein, prior to public deployment, AI providers must create national security cases for
their frontier AI systems before they are deployed, and after which they must report as
an incident any event that weakens a claim made in a ‘national security case’ for the AI
system. Secondly, the ‘Rapid Response Phase’: providers must notify a government agency
no later than 24 hours after discovering an incident has occurred so that, if appropriate, a
the government agency can coordinate an emergency containment response. And finally, the
‘Hardening Defenses Phase’ involves countering future threats to national security. Here, we
recommend that the government agency have two authorities – an ‘intelligence-gathering
authority’ which gives the government agency sufficient access to investigate the incident,
and a ‘security-strengthening authority’ which allows the government agency to direct all
relevant AI providers to amend their security and safety procedures. Against a backdrop
where AI systems’ ability to pose national security threats has rapidly progressed and may
continue to increase, the three phases of our proposal are grounded in common practice in
21We note that reflections on whether and how a government agency will have the technical capacity to
conduct these investigations is outside the scope of this paper.
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
other security-critical sectors, offering an intervention that can help to track and counter the
national security threats that may be posed by AI systems.
References
118th Congress. S.4230 - secure a.i. act of 2024. 118th Congress (2023-2024), 5 2024. URL
https://www.congress.gov/bill/118th-congress/senate-bill/4230.
Read twice
and referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
Allianz
Commercial.
Cyber
attacks
on
critical
infrastructure.
Technical
re-
port,
Allianz
Commercial
News
&
Insights,
June
2016.
URL
https:
//commercial.allianz.com/news-and-insights/expert-risk-articles/
cyber-attacks-on-critical-infrastructure.html. Online expert risk article.
Amodei, D. Machines of loving grace: How ai could transform the world for the better,
October 2024. URL https://darioamodei.com/machines-of-loving-grace. Essay on
potential positive transformations from advanced AI.
Andersen, B. and Fagerhaug, T. Root Cause Analysis. Quality Press, 2006.
Balesni, M., Hobbhahn, M., Lindner, D., Meinke, A., Korbak, T., Clymer, J., Shlegeris, B.,
Scheurer, J., Stix, C., Shah, R., Goldowsky-Dill, N., Braun, D., Chughtai, B., Evans, O.,
Kokotajlo, D., and Bushnaq, L. Towards evaluations-based safety cases for ai scheming,
2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.03336.
Baud, D. et al. Real estimates of mortality following COVID-19 infection. The Lancet Infec-
tious Diseases, 20(7):773, 2020. URL https://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/
article/PIIS1473-3099%2820%2930195-X/fulltext.
Bengio, Y., Hinton, G., Yao, A., Song, D., Abbeel, P., Darrell, T., Harari, Y. N., Zhang,
Y.-Q., Xue, L., Shalev-Shwartz, S., Hadfield, G., Clune, J., Maharaj, T., Hutter, F., Baydin,
A. G., McIlraith, S., Gao, Q., Acharya, A., Krueger, D., Dragan, A., Torr, P., Russell,
S., Kahneman, D., Brauner, J., and Mindermann, S. Managing extreme ai risks amid
rapid progress. Science, 384(6698):842–845, 2024. doi: 10.1126/science.adn0117. URL
https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.adn0117.
Bengio, Y., Mindermann, S., Privitera, D., Besiroglu, T., Bommasani, R., Casper, S., Choi,
Y., Fox, P., Garfinkel, B., Goldfarb, D., Heidari, H., Ho, A., Kapoor, S., Khalatbari, L.,
Longpre, S., Manning, S., Mavroudis, V., Mazeika, M., Michael, J., Newman, J., Ng, K. Y.,
Okolo, C. T., Raji, D., Sastry, G., Seger, E., Skeadas, T., South, T., Strubell, E., Tram`er,
F., Velasco, L., Wheeler, N., Acemoglu, D., Adekanmbi, O., Dalrymple, D., Dietterich,
T. G., Felten, E. W., Fung, P., Gourinchas, P.-O., Heintz, F., Hinton, G., Jennings, N.,
Krause, A., Leavy, S., Liang, P., Ludermir, T., Marda, V., Margetts, H., McDermid, J.,
Munga, J., Narayanan, A., Nelson, A., Neppel, C., Oh, A., Ramchurn, G., Russell, S.,
Schaake, M., Sch¨olkopf, B., Song, D., Soto, A., Tiedrich, L., Varoquaux, G., Yao, A., Zhang,
Y.-Q., Albalawi, F., Alserkal, M., Ajala, O., Avrin, G., Busch, C., de Leon Ferreira de
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
Carvalho, A. C. P., Fox, B., Gill, A. S., Hatip, A. H., Heikkil¨a, J., Jolly, G., Katzir, Z.,
Kitano, H., Kr¨uger, A., Johnson, C., Khan, S. M., Lee, K. M., Ligot, D. V., Molchanovskyi,
O., Monti, A., Mwamanzi, N., Nemer, M., Oliver, N., Portillo, J. R. L., Ravindran, B.,
Rivera, R. P., Riza, H., Rugege, C., Seoighe, C., Sheehan, J., Sheikh, H., Wong, D., and
Zeng, Y. International ai safety report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.17805.
Board, N. T. S. The investigative process. Technical report, National Transportation Safety
Board, 2024. URL https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/process/Pages/default.
aspx.
Buhl, M. D., Sett, G., Koessler, L., Schuett, J., and Anderljung, M. Safety cases for frontier
ai, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.21572.
Chan, H. Restrictions and regulations: How 9/11 impacted dc general aviation. Technical
report, FAA History Office, n.d. URL https://www.faa.gov/media/76196.
Chen, Q. and Bridges, R. A. Automated behavioral analysis of malware: A case study of
wannacry ransomware. In 2017 16th IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning
and Applications (ICMLA), pp. 454–460, 2017. doi: 10.1109/ICMLA.2017.0-119.
Christopher A. Mouton, Caleb Lucas, E. G. The operational risks of ai in large-scale biological
attacks. Technical report, RAND, 2023. URL https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_
reports/RRA2977-1.html.
Clymer, J., Gabrieli, N., Krueger, D., and Larsen, T. Safety cases: How to justify the safety
of advanced ai systems, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.10462.
Crowdstrike. Global threat report 2024. Technical report, Crowdstrike, 2024. URL https:
//go.crowdstrike.com/rs/281-OBQ-266/images/GlobalThreatReport2024.pdf.
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency.
Incident detection,
response,
and
prevention.
Technical
report,
U.S.
Department
of
Homeland
Security,
2024.
URL
https://www.cisa.gov/topics/cyber-threats-and-advisories/
incident-detection-response-and-prevention.
America’s Cyber Security De-
fense Agency.
Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate. Non-medical in-
terventions: A desk reference to help planners recover from COVID-19 and prepare for
future outbreaks and pandemics. Technical report, U.S. Department of Homeland Security,
6 2020. URL https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/2020_0604_
covid_19_interventions_rev14508.pdf. Developed in collaboration with the National
Science and Technology Council’s Subcommittee on Resilience Science and Technology
(SRST).
Dominion Energy Nuclear Connecticut, Inc. Loss of safety function and condition prohibited by
technical specifications for loss of secondary containment boundary. Licensee Event Report
2024-001-00, Millstone Power Station Unit 3, 314 Rope Ferry Road, Waterford, CT 06385,
October 2024. URL https://lersearch.inl.gov/PDFView.ashx?DOC::2542025001R00.
PDF. Docket No.: 50-423, License No.: NPF-49.
19

--- PAGE 20 ---
Drexel, B. and Withers, C.
Ai and the evolution of biological national security risks:
Capabilities, thresholds, and interventions. Technical report, Center for a New Amer-
ican Security, August 2024.
URL https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/
ai-and-the-evolution-of-biological-national-security-risks. Accessed: March
12, 2025.
Edwards,
B.
The
race
to
replace
us:
Anthropic
chief
says
AI
could
sur-
pass
“almost
all
humans
at
almost
everything”
shortly
after
2027.
Ars
Technica,
January
2025.
URL
https://arstechnica.com/ai/2025/01/
anthropic-chief-says-ai-could-surpass-almost-all-humans-at-almost-everything-shortly-
Encyclopedia Britannica. September 11 attacks, 2024. URL https://www.britannica.com/
event/September-11-attacks. Online encyclopedia article.
Esvelt, K. M., Gopal, A., and Jeyapragasan, G.
Comment on AI E.O. 14110
RFI: Recommendations for NIST’s Responsibilities in AI and Biosecurity.
Pub-
lic Comment ID051, SecureBio and MIT Sculpting Evolution, Cambridge, MA, 2
2024. URL https://www.nist.gov/system/files/documents/2024/02/16/ID051%20-%
202024-02-03%2C%20SecureBio%2C%20Comment%20on%20AI%20EO%20RFI.pdf.
Submit-
ted to NIST in response to Executive Order 14110 Request for Information.
Executive
Office
of
the
President.
Executive
order
14141:
Advancing
united
states leadership in artificial intelligence infrastructure.
Federal Register, 2025.
URL
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2025/01/17/2025-01395/
advancing-united-states-leadership-in-artificial-intelligence-infrastructure.
Federal
Aviation
Administration.
Security
considerations
for
the
flight-
deck
on
foreign
operated
transport
category
airplanes,
6
2002a.
URL
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2002/06/21/02-15524/
security-considerations-for-the-flightdeck-on-foreign-operated-transport-category-air
Federal Aviation Administration. Faa sets new standards for cockpit doors. Press release, U.S.
Department of Transportation, 1 2002b. URL https://avalon.law.yale.edu/sept11/
faa_001.asp. Archived by the Lillian Goldman Law Library, Yale Law S.
Federal
Aviation
Administration.
Pilot
certification
and
qualifi-
cation
requirements
for
air
carrier
operations,
7
2013.
URL
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2013/07/15/2013-16849/
pilot-certification-and-qualification-requirements-for-air-carrier-operations#
p-103.
Gaibulloev, K. and Sandler, T. What we have learned about terrorism since 9/11. Journal of
Economic Literature, 57(2):275–328, June 2019. ISSN 0022-0515. doi: 10.1257/jel.20181444.
Goemans, A., Buhl, M. D., Schuett, J., Korbak, T., Wang, J., Hilton, B., and Irving, G.
Safety case template for frontier ai: A cyber inability argument, 2024. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2411.08088.
20

--- PAGE 21 ---
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A.
Deep learning. MIT Press, 2016.
URL
https://www.deeplearningbook.org/.
Goodfellow, I. J., Shlens, J., and Szegedy, C. Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples,
2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6572.
Greenblatt, N. and Schlegeris, B.
Catching ais red-handed, 2024.
URL https://www.
alignmentforum.org/posts/i2nmBfCXnadeGmhzW/catching-ais-red-handed.
Hazell, J. Spear phishing with large language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2305.06972.
Hendrycks, D., Mazeika, M., and Woodside, T. An overview of catastrophic ai risks, 2023.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.12001.
Iftikhar, S. Cyberterrorism as a global threat: a review on repercussions and countermeasures.
PeerJ Computer Science, 10:e1772, January 2024. doi: 10.7717/peerj-cs.1772.
Inan, H., Upasani, K., Chi, J., Rungta, R., Iyer, K., Mao, Y., Tontchev, M., Hu, Q., Fuller,
B., Testuggine, D., and Khabsa, M. Llama guard: Llm-based input-output safeguard for
human-ai conversations, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.06674.
International Air Transport Association.
Root cause analysis for civil aviation au-
thorities and air navigation service providers.
IATA Training Website,
April
2016. URL https://web.archive.org/web/20160408000000*/https://www.iata.org/
training/courses/Pages/root-cause-analysis-tcvg50.aspx.
Classroom course, 5
days duration.
International Atomic Energy Agency. Reviewing operational experience feedback. Technical
Report IAEA-TECDOC-596, IAEA, 1991.
Karnofsky,
H.
If-then
commitments
for
AI
risk
reduction.
Carnegie
Cal-
ifornia,
9
2024.
URL
https://carnegieendowment.org/california/
if-then-commitments-for-ai-risk-reduction.
Carnegie California explores the
role of subnational regions as global players.
Klotz, L. and Sylvester, E. The consequences of a lab escape of a potential pandemic pathogen.
Frontiers in Public Health, 2:116, 2014. URL https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/
PMC4128296/.
Lee, R. M. et al. Analysis of the cyber attack on the ukrainian power grid. Technical report,
E-ISAC, 2016. URL https://media.kasperskycontenthub.com/wp-content/uploads/
sites/43/2016/05/20081514/E-ISAC_SANS_Ukraine_DUC_5.pdf.
Maslej, N. et al. The ai index 2024 annual report. Technical report, AI Index Steering Commit-
tee, Institute for Human-Centered AI, Stanford University,, 2024. URL https://aiindex.
stanford.edu/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/HAI_AI-Index-Report-2024.pdf.
21

--- PAGE 22 ---
Meselson, M., Guillemin, J., Hugh-Jones, M., Langmuir, A., Popova, I., Shelokov, A., and
Yampolskaya, O. The sverdlovsk anthrax outbreak of 1979. Science, 266(5188):1202–1208,
1994. doi: 10.1126/science.7973702. URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/
science.7973702.
METR. Common elements of frontier AI safety policies. Technical report, METR, 11 2024.
URL https://metr.org/common-elements.pdf.
Ministry of Defence. Safety management requirements for defence systems - part 1: Require-
ments, 2 2017.
URL https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/s3.spanglefish.com/
s/22631/documents/safety-specifications/def-stan-00-056-pt1-iss7-28feb17.
pdf.
National Institutes of Health. NIH guidelines for research involving recombinant or synthetic
nucleic acid molecules. Technical report, NIH, 2023. URL https://osp.od.nih.gov/
policies/incident-reporting-december-2023/.
National Institutes of Health. Nih guidelines section g-ii-c-5-c. Technical report, NIH, 2024.
URL https://osp.od.nih.gov/wp-content/uploads/NIH_Guidelines.htm.
National Institutes of Health Office of Science Policy. Template for reporting incidents subject
to the nih guidelines for research involving recombinant or synthetic nucleic acid molecules
to the national institutes of health office of science policy. Reporting template, National In-
stitutes of Health, 4 2019. URL https://osp.od.nih.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/
06/Incident-Reporting-Template_42319.docx. Template for incident reporting as re-
quired by the NIH Guidelines for Research Involving Recombinant or Synthetic Nucleic
Acid Molecules.
National Transportation Safety Board. Definitions, 1 2022a. URL https://www.ecfr.gov/
current/title-49/subtitle-B/chapter-VIII/part-830/subpart-A/section-830.2.
Current as of January 28, 2025.
National Transportation Safety Board. Notification and reporting of aircraft accidents or
incidents and overdue aircraft, and preservation of aircraft wreckage, mail, cargo, and
records. Code of Federal Regulations 49 CFR Part 830, U.S. Government Publishing
Office, 7 2022b. URL https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-49/part-830. Authority:
49 U.S.C. 1101-1155; Pub. L. 85-726, 72 Stat. 731 (codified as amended at 49 U.S.C. 40101).
Last amended July 14, 2022.
National Transportation Safety Board.
Immediate notification,
1 2025.
URL
https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-49/subtitle-B/chapter-VIII/part-830/
subpart-B/section-830.5. Last amended December 15, 2015.
Ngo, R., Chan, L., and Mindermann, S. The alignment problem from a deep learning
perspective, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.00626.
22

--- PAGE 23 ---
NIST. U.s. ai safety institute establishes new u.s. government taskforce to collaborate on
research and testing of ai models to manage national security capabilities and risks. Nist spe-
cial publication, NIST, 2024. URL https://www.nist.gov/news-events/news/2024/11/
us-ai-safety-institute-establishes-new-us-government-taskforce-collaborate.
Nuclear Energy Agency. Chernobyl: Assessment of radiological and health impacts. Technical
report, OECD Nuclear Energy Agency, 2002. URL https://www.oecd-nea.org/jcms/pl_
13598/chernobyl-assessment-of-radiological-and-health-impacts-2002.
2002
Update of Chernobyl: Ten Years On.
OECD. Assessing potentialfuture artificial intelligence risks,benefits and policy imperatives.
Technical report, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2024.
URL https://www.oecd.org/content/dam/oecd/en/publications/reports/2024/11/
assessing-potential-future-artificial-intelligence-risks-benefits-and-policy-imperativ
8a491447/3f4e3dfb-en.pdf.
OECD. Defining AI incidents and related terms. Technical Report 16, Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development, May 2024. URL https://www.oecd.org/en/
publications/defining-ai-incidents-and-related-terms_d1a8d965-en.html. Pre-
pared by Karine Perset and Luis Aranda under the supervision of Audrey Plonk.
Office of the Federal Register. 42 cfr § 73.18 - inspections, 2025. URL https://www.ecfr.gov/
current/title-42/chapter-I/subchapter-F/part-73/section-73.18.
Electronic
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 42, Chapter I, Subchapter F, Part 73, Section 18,
as of January 28, 2025.
Ooi, P. L., Lim, S., and Chew, S. K. Use of quarantine in the control of SARS in Singapore.
American Journal of Infection Control, 33(5):252–257, 6 2005. URL https://pubmed.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15947741/.
OpenAI. Gpt-4o system card. Technical report, OpenAI, 2024a. URL https://openai.com/
research/gpt-4o-system-card. This report outlines the safety work carried out prior to
releasing GPT-4o including external red teaming, frontier risk evaluations according to the
Preparedness Framework, and an overview of mitigations built to address key risk areas.
OpenAI. Openai o1 system card. Technical report, OpenAI, December 2024b. URL https:
//openai.com/research/openai-o1-system-card. This report outlines the safety work
carried out prior to releasing OpenAI o1, including external red teaming and frontier risk
evaluations according to the Preparedness Framework.
OpenAI. Deep research system card. Technical report, OpenAI, 2 2025. URL https://
claude.ai/chat/84498753-a4a7-453a-b231-efd221446eaf. This report outlines safety
work carried out prior to releasing deep research capabilities, including external red teaming,
frontier risk evaluations, and mitigation strategies for key risk areas.
Rasmussen, N. C. Reactor safety study: An assessment of accident risks in u.s. commercial
nuclear power plants.
Technical Report WASH-1400, NUREG-75/014, U.S. Nuclear
23

--- PAGE 24 ---
Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC, 1975.
URL https://www.nrc.gov/docs/
ML1533/ML15334A199.pdf. Also known as ”The Rasmussen Report”.
Register-Guard, E. T580 killed in history’s worst air disaster, 1977. URL https://news.
google.com/newspapers?id=j9ZVAAAAIBAJ&pg=6267%2C6928131.
Reuters. Us senators express bipartisan alarm about ai, focusing on biological attack, July
2023. URL https://archive.ph/4vFz6#selection-1733.0-1733.76/.
Roser, M. The brief history of artificial intelligence: the world has changed fast — what
might be next? Our World in Data, 2022. https://ourworldindata.org/brief-history-of-ai.
Ross, D. K. Ai incident reporting and security enhancement act, 9 2024. URL https:
//www.congress.gov/bill/118th-congress/house-bill/9720. Ordered to be Reported
by Voice Vote on September 25, 2024.
Sherrin, H. Three Mile Island: A timeline of the worst nuclear accident in US history, 3 2022.
URL https://www.historyhit.com/three-mile-island-timeline/. Online historical
article detailing the chronology of the 1979 Three Mile Island nuclear accident.
The Chernobyl Forum. Chernobyl’s legacy: Health, environmental and socio-economic
impacts and recommendations to the governments of belarus, the russian federation and
ukraine. Report, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, Austria, 2006. URL
https://www.iaea.org/sites/default/files/chernobyl.pdf. A joint publication of
IAEA, WHO, UNSCEAR, FAO, UN-OCHA, UNDP, UNEP and World Bank Group.
UK Government. Frontier AI safety commitments: AI seoul summit 2024. Policy paper, Gov-
ernment of the United Kingdom, 2024.
URL https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/frontier-ai-safety-commitments-ai-seoul-summit-2024/
frontier-ai-safety-commitments-ai-seoul-summit-2024.
Published under the
AI Safety Summit series.
United Nations Scientific Committee. Health effects due to radiation from the Chernobyl
accident. Unscear report, United Nations Scientific Committee, 2008. URL https://www.
unscear.org/docs/reports/2008/11-80076_Report_2008_Annex_D.pdf. Annex D.
United States Congress. National emergencies act, September 1976. URL https://www.
govtrack.us/congress/bills/94/hr3884/text. Public Law 94-412, 90 Stat. 1255.
United States Congress. 49 u.s.c. § 1131 - general authority, 2024. URL https://www.law.
cornell.edu/uscode/text/49/1131. As amended through Pub. L. 118-63, May 16, 2024,
138 Stat. 1425, 1426.
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. No Undue Risk: Regulating the Safety of Operat-
ing Nuclear Power Plants. Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation, Washington, DC, 6
2014. URL https://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/nuregs/brochures/
br0518/index.html. Last Updated: March 24, 2021.
24

--- PAGE 25 ---
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
Reporting requirements for specific events and
conditions, 11 2020. URL https://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/cfr/
part072/part072-0075.html. Last amended October 16, 2020.
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Report a safety or security concern, 2 2024a. URL
https://www.nrc.gov/about-nrc/regulatory/allegations-resp.html. U.S. Nuclear
Regulatory Commission, Page Last Reviewed: February 9, 2024.
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Nrc incident investigation program. Technical Report
MD 8.3, NRC, 2024b. URL https://www.nrc.gov/docs/ML2129/ML21294A050.pdf.
U.S.
Nuclear
Regulatory
Commission.
Licensee
event
report
system,
1
2025.
URL
https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-10/chapter-I/part-50/
subject-group-ECFReadbe827381d095/section-50.73.
Last
amended
January
28, 2025.
World Health Organization. Global covid-19 dashboard. Technical report, WHO, 2025. URL
https://data.who.int/dashboards/covid19/deaths?n=o.
25
