Executive Summary


Private labs in the United States believe they’re about to develop artificial superintelligence
(ASI), a technology that could provide an unmatched strategic advantage to whoever builds
and controls1 it. They could be right. But as it stands, frontier AI research is vulnerable to
espionage and sabotage, particularly from the CCP. All of our frontier labs are almost certainly
CCP-penetrated.2 The national security stakes of superintelligence are too high to let this status
quo continue.


That’s why there have been growing calls for deeper government involvement in securing
frontier AI research – up to and including a formal recommendation from the U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission to establish a “Manhattan Project for AGI”. The
prospect of a Manhattan Project for superintelligence has been widely discussed in the Silicon
Valley AI scene for years, and hit the mainstream when former OpenAI researcher Leopold
Aschenbrenner published his influential manifesto in June 2024.


But setting up and securing a national superintelligence project wouldn’t be easy. We’ve spent
the last 12 months figuring out how it could be done, what it would take for it to succeed, and
how it could fail. We interviewed over 100 domain specialists, including Tier 1 special forces
operators, intelligence professionals, researchers and executives at the world’s top AI labs,
former cyberoperatives with experience running nation-state campaigns, constitutional lawyers,
executives of data center design and construction companies, and experts in U.S. export
control policy, among others. Our investigation exposed severe vulnerabilities and critical open
problems in the security and management of frontier AI that must be solved – whether or not
we launch a national project – for America to establish and maintain a lasting advantage over
the CCP. These challenges include:


    ●    Supply chain security. The U.S. supply chain for critical AI infrastructure is highly
         exposed to adversary espionage and denial operations. We rely on Chinese
         manufacturing for key data center components, many of which can be compromised for


1 It’s possible that superintelligence can’t be controlled. We’ll discuss that scenario and what we can do

about it later.

2 To be clear: they are likely penetrated by other powers as well. China is noteworthy for being an

aggressive U.S. adversary with the technical talent base, energy production, and access to chips (for
now) required to be a genuine competitor in AI.


                                                                                                      3 of 62
    surveillance or sabotage. Onshoring these supply chains will take years – time we may
    not have. The problem extends to AI chip fabrication and packaging, which is largely
    done in Taiwan. A national superintelligence project built with existing supply chain
    components would risk embedding CCP trojan horses deep into the data centers that
    house some of the most national security-critical technology America will ever build.
    This isn’t a reason not to proceed; there are mitigations, but they come with hard trade-
    offs.


●   Model developer security. The "move fast and break things" ethos of Silicon Valley is
    incompatible with the security demands of superintelligence. Frontier lab security is far
    from where it needs to be to counter prioritized attacks by America’s nation-state
    adversaries. Insider threats are a big problem: a large fraction of frontier researchers in
    American labs are Chinese nationals, and the CCP is known to leverage individuals with
    family, financial, and other ties to mainland China – including U.S. citizens – as
    intelligence sources. There are also major cyber and physical security gaps that would
    allow a competent adversary to easily obtain sensitive IP, and compromise a national
    project.


●   Loss of control. A key objective of a national ASI project must be to develop AI-
    powered denial capabilities — *** * *** *** * ** *** *** *** ** * — that would allow the
    United States to stabilize the geostrategic environment **** ** *** **** ***** *** ****
    **** **** * ** ** ***** *. But an AI-powered denial capability is useless if it behaves
    unpredictably, and if it executes on its instructions in ways that have undesired, high-
    consequence side-effects. A national superintelligence project would need to actively
    assess the promise of our best AI control techniques, and to account for that
    information when making decisions about which capabilities to develop, and when. But
    that needs to be balanced with an imperative for speed: the CCP has already
    announced significant infrastructure investments on the order of a quarter trillion dollars
    in PPP terms that could be viewed as a first decisive move towards a nationally
    coordinated ASI strategy. Chinese AI labs are genuine contenders, even absent
    espionage. The race to superintelligence is already on.


●   Oversight. Superintelligence would concentrate power in unprecedented ways.
    Traditional checks and balances weren't designed for this. A national project
    needs robust oversight to prevent misuse, balancing speed with security while
    ensuring democratic accountability. We need mechanisms, analogous to the
    nuclear chain of command, to ensure no single person or group can wield this



                                                                                              4 of 62
        technology unchecked. And we’ll need an economic “offramp” for the
        technology: a path to ultimately put superintelligence-derived capabilities into
        the hands of everyday Americans without compromising national security, to
        support economic growth and empower individuals with the technology.

These challenges create a dilemma. We're not pricing in the military implications of
superintelligence, making it hard to justify investing in security now. But security can't be
bolted on later. Lead times for essential infrastructure are measured in years. Chip designs can't
be reworked overnight. We must either make a bold bet on securing critical AI infrastructure
now or find ourselves in a late-stage race to superintelligence with CCP-compromised
hardware and software stacks, developed by labs unable, for cultural and economic reasons, to
embrace the security culture this technology demands – and potentially without even the
ability to control it.

A project like this needs a new data center build, it needs security baked in from the ground
up, and it needs to be integrated from the start into an offensive counterintelligence motion
that disrupts similar projects by adversaries. As new capabilities come online that can buy
America time, they need to be quickly and efficiently folded into offensive activities, while
intelligence we collect from adversaries needs to inform the kinds of capabilities we seek to
develop in real-time.

The window to act is closing fast. Many in Silicon Valley believe we're less than a year away
from AI that can automate most software engineering work. Our interviews with current and
former frontier lab employees strongly suggest that belief is well-founded and genuine. If
they're right, we may need to break ground on a fully secure, gigawatt-scale AI data center
within months, and figure out how deal with contingencies. There's no guarantee we'll reach
superintelligence soon. But if we do, and we want to prevent the CCP from stealing or
crippling it, we need to start building the secure facilities for it yesterday.

Our report offers detailed recommendations, including specific actions that America can take
immediately, even without a full national project. Implementing these recommendations will be
a big task. It will require unprecedented coordination between government, industry, and the
national security community. It will be expensive, disruptive, and politically fraught. But the
alternative – a world in which the CCP builds superintelligence first, or in which we can’t
effectively control our own – is far worse.




                                                                                                5 of 62
