AI model developer security


Frontier AI models are trained and deployed on data center hardware. But the algorithmic
insights, data collection and preparation procedures, and other critical conceptual
breakthroughs that make those AI models more powerful are developed and honed inside the
frontier AI labs themselves. These AI labs are tempting targets for nation state espionage. Most
of them are also very poorly secured.


The conceptual insights that frontier AI labs are developing today will be used in the AI training
runs of the 2026 era and beyond. Current and former frontier lab researchers we interviewed
generally believe that some individual algorithmic insights could allow adversaries to train
frontier AI models ten times more efficiently — potentially unlocking billions of dollars of
efficiencies for very large models39 — and that those insights can be communicated in a ten-
minute conversation between experts.40


As with the physical supply chain for frontier AI we discussed earlier, the decisions we make
about AI model developer security today will shape our adversaries’ capabilities in 2026 and
beyond. But right now, frontier labs can’t make the right decisions about security because they
aren’t receiving regular threat intelligence updates from the national security and intelligence
communities.


Recommendation: As a first step, the U.S. government should share threat intelligence
updates with frontier AI labs on a regular basis. It should also develop a mechanism to
quickly declassify information that could contribute to labs’ security postures. Right now, the
U.S. government lacks situational awareness about the true extent of labs’ frontier capabilities,
but frontier labs also aren’t read in on the full range of threats they currently face.



39 Especially if you include the capex cost of building a large AI training cluster in the first place. If using

open-source algorithms lets you train an o3-level model for $10 billion including capex, then stolen
proprietary insights could let an adversary train it for $1 billion. (The numbers are hypothetical.)

40 Aschenbrenner claims the same thing in Situational Awareness, but it’s now also obvious from

advances like DeepSeek-V3. DeepSeek implemented three new but conceptually simple techniques
(DeepSeekMOE, multi-head latent attention, multi-token prediction) and those boosted their compute
efficiency by >10x. These are exactly the kinds of advantages that American AI labs develop internally.
It’s great that DeepSeek open sourced those techniques for us – but if we want an enduring lead, we
shouldn't return the favor.


                                                                                                         30 of 62
On the other hand, security measures can stifle progress and reduce R&D velocity. Falling
behind the CCP is just as bad whether it’s because our labs’ security is so poor that their
proprietary advances can be stolen, or because we hamstring our own researchers with security
protocols that weigh them down unnecessarily. We’ll need to invest in convenience tooling
for ultra-high-security AI development that minimizes the work ow disruptions introduced
by new layers of cyber and hardware-level security that we’ll have to introduce to the
advanced AI R&D stack. This work should be led by the private sector, but supported – and
potentially subsidized – by the U.S. government. We won’t go into details here, but there are
mechanisms through which this could be done efficiently, and quickly enough to get workable
prototypes online within the next 12 months. We’re happy to brief these in person if requested.



Personnel security

Personnel security at the frontier labs is a major challenge. The Chinese Ministry of State
Security (MSS) targets ethnic Chinese as a matter of highest-level national policy,41 and
routinely exploits them as a source of intelligence. It does this by applying systematic pressure
to individuals via their family, financial, and other ties to the mainland, to encourage them to
collect and report commercial and other intelligence. This is of direct concern to U.S.-based
frontier AI research and development: according to a senior researcher at a leading U.S.-based
frontier AI lab, “In terms of percent [of frontier lab researchers] that’s foreign born, it’s well over
50%. [...] A pretty high portion of lab employees are [specifically] Chinese nationals.”


CCP espionage activity and penetration in the United States — particularly that target Chinese
nationals — is extensive and highly systematized. For example, a former senior national
security executive shared the following story: “While I was at *** ***** there was a power
outage up in Oakland that affected Berkeley. There was a dorm that lost power and most of the
campus lost internet connection. And the RA of the dorm ended up talking to one of our CI
activities and all of the Chinese students were freaking the hell out because they had an
obligation to do a time-based check-in, and if they didn’t check in, like, maybe your mom’s
insulin medicine doesn’t show up, maybe your brother’s travel approval [doesn’t come
through]. [...] The fidelity with which they control their operatives is super high.” The impact of


41 While public sources have tended to emphasize Chinese nationality over ethnicity in terms of MSS

targeting, several former defense and intelligence officers we spoke to were very clear that Chinese
ethnicity was being prioritized. This is also consistent with some of Xi Jinping’s recent statements.


                                                                                                   31 of 62
                                                         fl
this kind of activity on AI is direct. A former senior intelligence official we spoke to told us that
there are non-public cases in which unpublished Google research has been acquired by the
Chinese, and made widely accessible to university students in China, for example.


According to intelligence professionals with direct experience countering these activities, the
CCP applies pressure through a well tested escalation playbook: from what we’ve been able to
gather, this typically starts with minor punishments such as limiting healthcare or career
opportunities to relatives on the mainland, and ratchets up systematically to confiscation of
personal assets, imprisonment or disappearance of relatives in China, and physical intimidation
on U.S. soil using infrastructure they’ve established for that purpose. The uncomfortable truth is
that the CCP applies this pressure not just to their own citizens, but also to ethnic Chinese
abroad – including some U.S. citizens of Chinese origin – particularly if they have family or
financial ties to the Chinese mainland. Of course, Chinese researchers have been invaluable to
American tech for generations, and to frontier AI in particular today — and their contributions
will continue to help America compete with the CCP. But any American superintelligence
project must be designed in a way that recognizes the immense leverage that the CCP can
exert over researchers whose loved ones or assets are located within China’s sphere of
influence.


The United States will face significant challenges in addressing insider threats from the CCP
and other well-resourced actors. These will include constitutional roadblocks, and the fact that
some of the most technically capable talent employed by U.S. firms may itself be
compromised. That forces a direct trade-off between security and technical bench depth at all
levels of the AI supply chain. We will need to put in place stringent security and
counterintelligence measures if we’re going to stand a chance of limiting critical IP leaks to the
CCP and other adversaries. These measures will probably reduce development velocity, and
their impact will be felt most acutely within frontier AI labs themselves.

Frontier labs face strong incentives to prioritize speed over security. This is where Silicon
Valley’s edge has come from, historically: competitive pressure and rapid, open iteration has
propelled American tech forward in an environment with capped downside risks (at worst, a
company folds), and near-unlimited upside potential. In that setting, even labs and researchers
who consider themselves security-conscious relative to their peers can significantly
underestimate the CCP’s motivation and capability to extract sensitive IP.

The result of all this is a deeply rooted culture of bad personnel security. Real personnel
security for a project developing potential WMD capabilities looks like intense vetting scrutiny,
including detailed inquiries about family locations and extensive travel histories, all rigorously


                                                                                                32 of 62
cross-validated. It looks like continuous monitoring of personnel and their communications,
employee atmospherics and trends, up to and including handing over personal phones and
laptops for review. It calls for insider threat programs, active surveillance, and other privacy-
violating activities. These things slow down research and frustrate researchers. But they are
some of the basic personnel security procedures that would apply to any government-backed
project expected to produce WMD capabilities.

These security measures are all the more critical in Silicon Valley’s AGI scene, where naive
researchers recommend and hire based on (often publicly legible) social networks and with
little to no accounting for national security factors. The social fabric and culture of Silicon
Valley’s leading AI labs makes them particularly vulnerable to CCP infiltration and HUMINT
gathering. We’ve seen firsthand how freely sensitive information flows in these circles: our team
— at the time, independent researchers — were receiving updates on proprietary frontier AI
training runs as far back as 2020. Leaks remain extremely common.

Recommendation: A national superintelligence project will have to make hard choices about
who to include in its security umbrella, and about what to do with AI researchers and engineers
who don’t pass the security bar. There are executive authorities and other tools that can help
with this, *** ** ** * *** ** * *** ** * ** **** ** * ** *** ** *** **** *** * * **** ** ** *** *** *** ***
* * * (we can provide in-person briefings if requested).


A large fraction of the world’s best AI researchers come from abroad, so we’ll have to find a
way to vet, clear, and hire top talent from other countries. Aggressively expanding the Limited
Access Authorization program – which helps U.S. national laboratories hire foreign talent –
could be a way to do this.


We’ll also need a security clearance process that’s better than the U.S. government’s
ordinary clearance process. Multiple national security and intelligence professionals have told
us that the existing process for Top Secret clearances is too slow and in any case fails to
leverage all the information it should — even failing to use unclassified information from
OSINT, ADINT, and commercially available sensors.42 The key question then becomes how the
government can certify these private sector clearances and link them to access and
participation in the project. This is probably doable through an executive order, which should

42 The existing clearance process doesn’t use dark web data, phone number analysis, ad IDs (“ADINT”),

native language checks using foreign sources, or even much publicly available OSINT. It also doesn’t
necessarily use all the data that’s available to the government internally. As one expert in background
check systems told us, “a criminal record in one county may be completely unknown if the individual
moves across the country.”


                                                                                                    33 of 62
also authorize frontier labs to hire and let go of employees on the basis of these background
checks (to avoid wrongful termination lawsuits).


The personnel risk here isn’t just about securing model weights from theft, or even protecting
data center facilities from sabotage. As we mentioned above, there are algorithmic trade
secrets that can be conveyed in a ten minute conversation between experts, and that if
implemented can save billions of dollars and months of experimentation on the path to
superintelligence.


We already know from dozens of sources that the current state of security at frontier labs is not
up to these challenges. But a former defense official with extensive counterintelligence
experience shared his assessment with us that all these labs are almost certainly severely
penetrated by the CCP. He added that if legislators fully understood the potential for
compromise of these labs by foreign nationals, there would immediately be a much stronger
push for tighter controls. In our assessment, we should assume that the Chinese government
knows all the algorithmic secrets that all U.S. AI labs know today — those secrets clearly aren’t
hard for them to steal under current conditions — and that those secrets have been
disseminated to their own national AI champions.43 But that’s a bad reason to keep leaking all
the algorithmic insights that we’ll develop in the future too. We’ll have to clear any personnel
working on the project, and turn to a combination of public and private solutions to improve
that clearing process, as discussed above.



Cybersecurity

Cybersecurity is another core challenge for a superintelligence project. The software libraries
leading AI labs use have been compromised in the past, and frontier AI researchers depend
heavily on insecure open-source software to move as fast as they do. Software development
tools, including the coding assistants researchers use and the data they’re trained on, are
potential attack vectors as well.


During our investigation, we spoke to one former OpenAI researcher who claimed to have
been aware of several critical security vulnerabilities, including one that allowed users to


43 We have no specific information regarding which companies these would be, but they likely include

Huawei, Alibaba, Baidu, Tencent, and ByteDance and probably also some smaller companies like
DeepSeek and 01.ai.


                                                                                               34 of 62
perform ***** ** ** ****** **** **** **** * ** **** ***** * ** **** ******* ** ** **, such as
granting access to the weights of the lab’s most valuable AI model — their crown jewels. The
researcher was later also made aware of an additional vulnerability discovered by red teamers
that had been logged in the lab’s internal documentation and Slack channels, but left
unaddressed. By his assessment, this second vulnerability would have allowed any employee to
exfiltrate model weights from the lab’s servers undetected. Together, these two vulnerabilities
made it possible to (1) access; and (2) extract some of OpenAI’s most sensitive IP, worth billions
of dollars. He told us that these issues had been flagged for security teams and management,
but that they went unaddressed for months.44 To this day, he has no idea whether a fix has
been implemented.

According to several researchers we spoke to, security at frontier AI labs has improved
somewhat in the past year, but it remains completely inadequate to withstand nation state
attacks. According to former insiders, poor controls at many frontier AI labs originally stem
from a cultural bias towards speed over security. This is a major challenge we’ll face in securing
AI labs for a superintelligence project. Most AI labs have a deep cultural aversion to anything
more than token personnel or cyber security measures – an aversion that’s sometimes seeded
and reinforced by commitments to transhumanist or other ideologies.

It’s worth underlining what happens when an adversary steals cutting-edge AI model weights. If
an adversary steals the weights of a model you’re developing, any lead you had in base model
pretraining45 instantly goes to zero — or even negative, if they have the benefit of your
discoveries in addition to their own.46 (Code and training techniques can be just as critical, at
least until AI systems are doing most of our AI R&D work themselves.)

Recommendation: The NSA should be working directly with all frontier labs to accelerate
their software and cyber security, alongside private sector red teams. This should include
very robust pentesting activities. Ideally, it would also involve support from private security
firms with experience securing sensitive national security sites.

44 And of course, if news of these specific vulnerabilities worked its way to us, then adversaries like the

CCP were likely aware of them as well.

45 Thanks to inference-time scaling, we could still retain an overall lead in AI capabilities if we have a

larger stockpile of inference compute than our adversaries. But if the infrastructure we use to perform
inference on national security-critical models is compromised, adversaries could monitor what we’re
using those models for, and potentially interfere with their behavior. Having a larger inference-time
compute stockpile is good, but securing that infrastructure is still essential.

46 Your lead is also negative in another sense: after they’ve stolen your model, they still have their full

opex budget available to spend on augmenting or supplementing the model’s capabilities.


                                                                                                       35 of 62
People have already started working on determining what it would take to stop high-capability
adversaries from stealing model weights. We won’t rehash the details here, other than to say
that while these efforts are commendable, they focus mostly on preventing theft and not denial
attacks47 (like drone strikes, missile strikes, physical sabotage, or certain cyberattacks). And so
far, the IC and broader national security community haven’t taken a leading role on this; that
will have to change quickly. The most significant vulnerabilities that data centers and other
critical AI infrastructure have to nation state-level attacks can only be identified and mitigated
by intelligence, defense, and national security agencies with access to sensitive data, as well as
deep domain expertise and experience carrying out and defending against adversary
operations.


If we only recognize the need for a superintelligence project relatively soon before
superintelligent AI is achieved, then we’ll have no choice but to urgently retrofit key facilities to
higher levels of security. In that scenario, we’ll need especially deep and ongoing integration
between U.S. national security agencies and the teams involved in the retrofitting process,
because a lot of the tradeoffs between speed and security are extremely context dependent. If
we have to make those trade-offs, we should make them deliberately, and they should be
made by people who have full access to informed assessments of the strategic implications of
various security and infrastructure design choices.


Finally, if our adversaries do manage to steal the weights of superintelligence-grade models,
we’ll want to make sure that we maintain a decisive lead on centralized inference-time compute
capacity. Even if adversaries exfiltrate critical model weights, we may still be able to achieve
better performance than they can from the same model if we can dedicate more FLOPs to
inference than they can.



Emissions security

In a context where multi-billion dollar technical secrets can be leaked in a five-minute
conversation, IP security becomes a critical problem. Parabolic and laser microphones,
piezoelectric sensors, and other surveillance technology can be used to eavesdrop on sensitive


47 Note also that denial attacks can be the first step of an IP extraction attack: if an adversary destroys

our secure R&D facilities, we may be forced to relocate critical work to less secure facilities that are more
vulnerable to IP theft.


                                                                                                       36 of 62
conversations easily. This is particularly true when espionage targets are in offices in densely
populated urban areas, because adversaries can hide their surveillance operations in the city
noise and disguise them as legitimate business or urban activity. A U.S. government-backed
superintelligence project would have to move its R&D work — including algorithm
development — to facilities that we can secure against sophisticated adversary information
collection operations like these, and against the TEMPEST threats we mentioned earlier.


Recommendation: According to former special operations and intelligence professionals we
interviewed, the most straightforward way to achieve good emissions security is to build new
facilities in green eld locations far from densely populated urban areas. But this introduces
yet another trade-off for project efficiency and recruitment. Frontier AI researchers are used to
the conveniences of life in e.g. downtown San Francisco, so some may not be inclined to join a
project that requires them to relocate to remote locations and be subjected to close
surveillance by national security entities. Having said this, many frontier AI researchers consider
their work on superintelligence to be a calling rather than a job — and we suspect many of the
best will choose to work even in an inconvenient, highly secure environment rather than be left
behind. The AI labs and their researchers believe themselves to be at the center of a unique
historical inflection, and that’s worth a lot of annoyance, inconvenience, and even pain to many
of them.




                                                                                            37 of 62
   fi
