The chain of command


If a national-scale project works and we build a superintelligence, prevent it from being stolen,
and manage to contain and steer it, a few people will find themselves in control of a world-
defining technology. The decisions those people make will shape the future of America and the
world beyond. Even if this project achieves all its other objectives, it will fail if those in control
use their power in a way that undermines American ideals.


The concentration of power that comes with superintelligence is as much a problem for the
private AI labs who might build it as it would be for a national project. That’s why frontier AI
researchers, startup founders, and investors — including some of the most influential figures in
Silicon Valley — have already started privately raising concerns about the leadership of some of
those private AI labs. To quote one frontier researcher as he was discussing a particular top
lab’s CEO, “It seems clear he’s a pathological liar, and I think there’s a good chance that he’s a
full-on sociopath. He’s power-hungry, and I’d bet he’s willing to trade U.S. national security
interests for a better chance of controlling superintelligence. As far as I know, he’s not opposed
to making compute clusters in [regions under totalitarian control]. He’s probably up there in
terms of one of the worst people to run a government AI project.” He later added, “Very many
people who’ve worked with him closely feel the same – maybe not as strongly, but basically the
same.” At the time, we were surprised enough by this position that we interviewed several
other individuals with professional exposure to the CEO in question. And while their views did
vary, a majority did generally agree with that researcher’s assessment.


While we found that case surprising and notable, the issue isn’t whether or not a specific AI
executive is willing to compromise U.S. interests or is otherwise driven by a desire for personal
power. The real problem is that all the checks and balances on power that American democracy
depends on simply fall apart in the face of superintelligence.57


Many frontier lab insiders and top Silicon Valley investors openly expect that the capabilities of
near-future AI systems will make it possible for one person to create mutli-billion dollar

57 Several whistleblowers shared their concerns with us about current checks and balances at frontier

labs. As one former OpenAI researcher told us, referring to OpenAI’s new board, “Frankly, the function
of the Board is to pretend to oversee the company.” Of course opinions will differ, and we spoke to
some current OpenAI employees who said they did not share this view. This level of oversight would also
be perfectly fine at a random software company. But it’s not strong enough for a company that’s said it’s
aiming to build a superintelligence.


                                                                                                   45 of 62
businesses alone. We think this is probably true, but its implications obviously don’t stop at
“single-employee unicorn startups”. If AI really does provide this much leverage, it could easily
make it possible for a single person at a computer console to launch nation-crippling
cyberattacks or automated persuasion campaigns without anyone else signing off, or even
knowing about it.

Power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely. This level of power is dangerous for a
fundamental reason: it threatens basic American freedoms. The Founding Fathers wrote
separation of powers into the constitution for a reason. The constitutional mechanisms they
introduced have stood the test of time, but they weren’t built to handle the extreme power that
could come with technology like superintelligence.

Superintelligence will concentrate power like we’ve never seen before, and in ways that aren’t
necessarily obvious. If Xi Jinping had a superintelligent AI deployed at scale, he wouldn’t need
to keep his population under control by conventional means — or even necessarily to keep
them alive at all: ultimately, his tax revenues would come from an automated economy, in
which people are mostly dead weight. Even in America, a 4-year political appointee who
happens to oversee a superintelligence project might end up wielding more power than any
leader in history ever has, despite not having been appointed with anything close to that level
of responsibility in mind. What’s more, the person or group that controls superintelligence may
be able to use it to circumvent their chain of command and democratic restraints in any
number of ways, including by deceiving or persuading others that they’re doing the right thing.


The imperative to prevent concentration of power and protect the project from corruption has
to be traded off against two hard requirements. The first is time: checks and balances take time
to develop and they slow down progress. And the second is security: information relevant to
major decisions about the direction of the project will have to be closely held to prevent
damaging leaks.


But too much concentration of power in a superintelligence project isn’t something that can be
fixed after the fact. The chain of command for a national AI project will need to have oversight
over both the superintelligent AI itself, and also over the AI systems the project develops on
the path to superintelligence, if they have specific superhuman capabilities like persuasion and
deception that could compromise the project from the inside. We won’t get many chances to
get this right.


The chain of command needs to be put in place before it’s needed, or the entire project could
be corrupted by a small group of people. Thanks to automated AI research agents, frontier


                                                                                             46 of 62
labs’ most advanced activities could ultimately be controlled by just a few people — or even
just by one. In fact, one frontier researcher, who was citing OpenAI as an example, remarked
“Man, at some point the silo might be literally [OpenAI President] Greg Brockman”.


Recommendations: If a national project has perfect security and it manages to solve the
problem of controlling a superintelligent AI, then a small handful of people will end up in
control of the most powerful technology ever created. AI isn’t like nuclear weapons, where
most of the power comes from the technology’s destructive potential. If you really have a
superintelligent AI under your control, you might be able to reshape the world directly on your
own. That’s a recipe for the worst kind of corruption – especially because the demands of
project security mean that the group in control needs to remain small.


This problem only matters if we can both secure and control a superintelligence first — if we
fail at either of those things, then it won’t matter how good our oversight is. But we still need
to think about this now, because security, control, and oversight are problems that could come
up in quick succession one after another. It could be a pretty short jump from an AI that’s so
capable that destroying or stealing it becomes a CCP strategic priority (security), to an AI that’s
dangerously hard to control (control), to an AI superweapon that centralizes power in a totally
unprecedented way (chain of command).

Whatever form a push to superintelligence takes, we’ll need to have checks and balances in
place from the very beginning that will prevent the individuals in charge from using the
technology for their own personal or ideological reasons. But just putting the right people in
charge won’t be enough. Not only does power corrupt, but we should be prepared for the
possibility that AI systems developed on the path to superintelligence will develop the ability
to persuade or compel their operators to do things they normally wouldn’t.

The checks and balances we build will need to guide us through a transition period, when we
have AIs that are very capable but still below the level of superintelligence. We also need to be
able to halt development if we get security data that suggests a serious breach, technical data
that indicates that controlling a superintelligence will be too difficult under current conditions,
or indications that oversight mechanisms are at serious risk of failing. And we’ll have to build
these checks into a project well before they’re actually needed.

No one has experience designing an oversight mechanism for such a speculative, high-stakes
project. That said, the nuclear chain of command is a good example of a high-stakes context in
which security, response times, and democratic accountability all have to be balanced carefully.
We spoke to specialists in nuclear deterrence, security, and defense to figure how oversight



                                                                                             47 of 62
mechanisms for nuclear technology could inform the design of a superintelligence project, and
were surprised at some potential quick wins that they flagged.

First, it’s a common misconception that the nuclear chain of command always begins with the
President. In some contexts, authority to launch nukes is delegated to base commanders or
similar personnel to ensure short response times (though additional checks do apply to them).
Similarly, in the context of a national superintelligence project, there will surely be game-time
decisions that cyber operators or national security leadership will have to make quickly and
with minimal intelligence signatures, but these can be narrowly scoped. Figuring out exactly
which decisions can be made in real-time by a small set of people, and which need to be
escalated to a decision-maker with greater democratic accountability is an obvious place to
start.

Some other questions project designers will have to answer include:

    ●    How many people should have to give independent sign-off for major decisions – and
         which decisions count as “major”?
    ●    We’ll need to test and verify the integrity of the project’s chain of command – both the
         individuals within it, to detect potential signs of duress or foreign influence, and the
         communications channels they rely on. How should that be done, and by whom?
    ●    What technical mechanisms, such as codes and keys, should be used? In the current
         paradigm, users provide AI systems with a prompt to give it instructions. That’s quite
         different from the far more restricted action space available to the operators of nuclear
         weapons (roughly: where do I aim, and should I launch or not?). Presumably we want
         some mechanism to validate the prompts that are fed to the project’s WMD-like
         models; how should that happen?
    ●    The technology the project develops could have tremendous economic value. How can
         we ensure that there’s an “offramp” that allows capabilities we develop in the project’s
         secure environment to enter the free market to drive growth and prosperity?
    ●    How do we maintain democratic accountability for project leadership? The project
         needs to be ultimately responsible to elected representatives of the popular will, the
         same way our military chain of command operates under civilian leadership.
    ●    How do we design the right incentives for project leadership? What mechanisms can we
         use to remove participants if they seem to be compromised, and how can we design
         those mechanisms so that they can’t themselves be compromised?
    ●    The space between incentives and behavior is filled by culture. What is the appropriate
         culture of the project team? How should it balance the imperative to move fast with the




                                                                                              48 of 62
        security, oversight, and control risks that the project could face? And what does that
        imply about personnel selection for project leadership, and more operational roles?

Apart from the basics, there are some easy wins we already know from experience that we’ll
need.58 For example, the oversight team will need to talk to the technical researchers on
the project directly and constantly, instead of getting all their information through the
leadership team. Right now, some frontier AI labs use their “policy teams” as a smokescreen
to filter the information they pass on to the government.59 Government officials get fed pre-
selected information from policy teams and lab leadership, when they should instead be
talking directly to the researchers and engineers who are doing the work to get a true picture
of what’s going on (including those working on capabilities, security, and control). We’ve heard
this complaint privately from dozens on both sides. Some government teams know they aren’t
getting the full picture but they aren’t able to talk to the technical teams. And many technical
researchers want to share their concerns with the government but their labs don’t allow them
to. That kind of obfuscation won’t fly in a project like this one, and in fact we should put in
place explicit whistleblower protections and a duty to report to make sure problems don’t get
swept under the rug.

Setting up good oversight will be hard. But the good news is that if we do this well, it will give
us an advantage over adversaries in the AI race as well. If there’s a global race to
superintelligence, countries and people will have to choose sides. If this happens, the United
States can give itself an advantage by publicly committing to credible, democratically
accountable oversight of its project. A Chinese effort would be much less credible because
democratic oversight of a project like this is incompatible with China’s recent history, the CCP’s
culture, and its values. We should lean into this, commit to as much transparency and oversight
as we can, and do it boldly and proactively. If Chinese messaging is the first to emphasize a
democratic mandate — no matter how little real credibility those claims may have — we’ll be
seen as playing catch-up to China in a domain where our values should have placed us first. We
should also commit to sharing the benefits of superintelligent AI to support our allies, and to
encourage them to remain aligned with American superintelligence and national security
efforts along the way.




58 There are also some easy wins that we don’t have experience with yet but that we’ll obviously need in

the future. For example we’ll need operational controls that scale with the capabilities of the AI — things
like maintaining digital chains of custody, and preventing any project team member from querying the AI
on their own if the AI’s persuasive capabilities are rated high enough.

59 This has been a recurring theme in our conversations with AI lab insiders.




                                                                                                   49 of 62
