       COMPREHENSIVE LIST OF
THE COMMISSION’S 2024 RECOMMENDATIONS

     Part II: Technology and Consumer Product
                 Opportunities and Risks
Chapter 3: U.S.-China Competition in Emerging Technologies
The Commission recommends:
 1. Congress establish and fund a Manhattan Project-like program
    dedicated to racing to and acquiring an Artificial General In-
    telligence (AGI) capability. AGI is generally defined as systems
    that are as good as or better than human capabilities across
    all cognitive domains and would surpass the sharpest human
    minds at every task. Among the specific actions the Commission
    recommends for Congress:
    • Provide broad multiyear contracting authority to the execu-
       tive branch and associated funding for leading artificial in-
       telligence, cloud, and data center companies and others to
       advance the stated policy at a pace and scale consistent with
       the goal of U.S. AGI leadership; and
    • Direct the U.S. secretary of defense to provide a Defense Pri-
       orities and Allocations System “DX Rating” to items in the
       artificial intelligence ecosystem to ensure this project receives
       national priority.
 2. Congress consider legislation to:
    • Require prior approval and ongoing oversight of Chinese in-
       volvement in biotechnology companies engaged in operations
       in the United States, including research or other related
       transactions. Such approval and oversight operations shall
       be conducted by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
       Services in consultation with other appropriate governmental
       entities. In identifying the involvement of Chinese entities
       or interests in the U.S. biotechnology sector, Congress should
       include firms and persons:
       ○ Engaged in genomic research;
       ○ Evaluating and/or reporting on genetic data, including for
          medical or therapeutic purposes or ancestral documenta-
          tion;
       ○ Participating in pharmaceutical development;
       ○ Involved with U.S. colleges and universities; and
       ○ Involved with federal, state, or local governments or agen-
          cies and departments.
                                 (733)
                               734

   • Support significant Federal Government investments in bio-
      technology in the United States and with U.S. entities at
      every level of the technology development cycle and supply
      chain, from basic research through product development and
      market deployment, including investments in intermediate
      services capacity and equipment manufacturing capacity.
3. To protect U.S. economic and national security interests, Con-
   gress consider legislation to restrict or ban the importation of
   certain technologies and services controlled by Chinese entities,
   including:
   • Autonomous humanoid robots with advanced capabilities of
      (i) dexterity, (ii) locomotion, and (iii) intelligence; and
   • Energy infrastructure products that involve remote servicing,
      maintenance, or monitoring capabilities, such as load balanc-
      ing and other batteries supporting the electrical grid, bat-
      teries used as backup systems for industrial facilities and/
      or critical infrastructure, and transformers and associated
      equipment.
4. Congress encourage the Administration’s ongoing rulemaking
   efforts regarding “connected vehicles” to cover industrial ma-
   chinery, Internet of Things devices, appliances, and other con-
   nected devices produced by Chinese entities or including Chi-
   nese technologies that can be accessed, serviced, maintained, or
   updated remotely or through physical updates.
5. Congress enact legislation prohibiting granting seats on boards
   of directors and information rights to China-based investors in
   strategic technology sectors. Allowing foreign investors to hold
   seats and observer seats on the boards of U.S. technology start-
   ups provides them with sensitive strategic information, which
   could be leveraged to gain competitive advantages. Prohibiting
   this practice would protect intellectual property and ensure that
   U.S. technological advances are not compromised. It would also
   reduce the risk of corporate espionage, safeguarding America’s
   leadership in emerging technologies.
6. Congress establish that:
   • The U.S. government will unilaterally or with key interna-
      tional partners seek to vertically integrate in the develop-
      ment and commercialization of quantum technology.
   • Federal Government investments in quantum technology
      support every level of the technology development cycle and
      supply chain from basic research through product develop-
      ment and market deployment, including investments in in-
      termediate services capacity.
   • The Office of Science and Technology Policy, in consultation
      with appropriate agencies and experts, develop a Quantum
      Technology Supply Chain Roadmap to ensure that the United
      States coordinates outbound investment, U.S. critical supply
      chain assessments, the activities of the Committee on Foreign
      Investment in the United States (CFIUS), and federally sup-
      ported research activities to ensure that the United States,
                                735

      along with key allies and partners, will lead in this critical
      technology and not advance Chinese capabilities and devel-
      opment.
Chapter 4: Unsafe and Unregulated Chinese Consumer Goods:
    Challenges in Enforcing Import Regulations and Laws
The Commission recommends:
 7. With respect to imports sold through an online marketplace,
    Congress eliminate Section 321 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (also
    known as the “de minimis” exemption), which allows goods val-
    ued under $800 to enter the United States duty free and, for
    all practical purposes, with less rigorous regulatory inspection.
    Congress should provide U.S. Customs and Border Protection
    adequate resources, including staff and technology, for imple-
    mentation, monitoring, and enforcement.
 8. Congress amend the Consumer Product Safety Act to (1) grant
    the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) unilat-
    eral mandatory recall authority over products where the Chi-
    nese seller is unresponsive to requests from the CPSC for fur-
    ther information or to initiate a voluntary recall and the CPSC
    has evidence of a substantial product hazard, defined as either
    failing to comply with any CPSC rule, regulation, standard, or
    ban or posing a substantial risk of injury to the public; and (2)
    classify Chinese e-commerce platforms as distributors to allow
    for enforcement of recalls and other safety standards for prod-
    ucts sold on these platforms.
 9. Congress direct the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and
    U.S. Customs and Border Protection, in conjunction with the
    U.S. Department of Commerce, to develop assessment tools ca-
    pable of identifying the true origins of parts, components, and
    materials contained in products entering the United States to
    prevent tariff evasion and limit safety and security risks in
    light of the increasing complexity of global supply chains.
10. Congress require that the U.S. Trade Representative, in consul-
    tation with the U.S. Department of Commerce, the U.S. Inter-
    national Trade Commission, and other entities, as appropriate,
    prepare a comprehensive report within 90 days on the operation
    of the U.S.-Mexico-Canada Trade Agreement since its entry into
    force that provides data and information on:
    • Chinese-affiliated investments in Mexico and Canada and
       specific information on their production of goods and how
       those goods may enter the U.S. market either as finished
       products or as components in other products;
    • Trade flows of products produced in China to Mexico and
       Canada and how such trade flows have changed;
    • Prices of products produced in China shipped to Mexico and
       Canada as well as products shipped through those countries
       to the United States and how those prices relate to the prices
       of such goods shipped directly into the U.S. market; and
    • Trade enforcement actions by Mexico and Canada regarding
       Chinese-produced products (including those transshipped
                                  736

      through third countries’ markets) and how such actions re-
      late to U.S. trade enforcement actions.
11. Congress amend applicable laws to mandate that online mar-
    ketplaces clearly disclose on product listings for Chinese-made
    goods the name, physical address, and contact information for
    the manufacturer. The online marketplaces should also be re-
    quired to clearly display a warning label that the item is man-
    ufactured in a country that does not comply with U.S. consumer
    safety standards.
12. Congress direct the U.S. Government Accountability Office to
    investigate the reliability of safety testing certifications for con-
    sumer products and medical devices imported from China.

           Part III: Competition and Conflict
Chapter 5: China and the Middle East
The Commission recommends:
13. Congress direct the Office of the Director of National Intelli-
    gence to produce and provide to the U.S. Department of the
    Treasury within six months a detailed study of Chinese pur-
    chases of Iranian oil over the span of the last five years. The
    study shall include analysis of China’s use of transshipment
    points and shell companies as methods to insulate itself from
    sanctions. Congress should further direct that within six months
    of receipt of the study, the Treasury Department must make a
    determination if sanctionable activity is occurring and report its
    findings to Congress.
14. Congress direct the U.S. member on the International Maritime
    Organization (IMO) Council to use their voice and vote to re-
    quire China to abide by its treaty obligations under the IMO
    conventions, including by upholding safety regulations on the
    use of Automatic Identification System transponders.
Chapter 6: Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-
    China Playing Field
The Commission recommends:
15. Congress consider legislation to eliminate federal tax expendi-
    tures for investments in Chinese companies on the Entity List
    maintained by the U.S. Department of Commerce, or identified
    as a Chinese military company on either the “Non-Specially
    Designated National (SDN) Chinese Military-Industrial Com-
    plex Companies List” maintained by the U.S. Department of
    the Treasury or the “Chinese military companies” list main-
    tained by the U.S. Department of Defense. Among the tax
    expenditures that would be eliminated prospectively are the
    preferential capital gains tax rate, the capital loss carry-for-
    ward provisions, and the treatment of carried interest.
16. To enhance the effectiveness of export controls, Congress should:
    • Improve the analytic and enforcement capabilities of the U.S.
      Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security
      (BIS) by providing resources necessary to hire more in-house
                                 737

      experts; establish a Secretary’s Fellows Program to more ef-
      fectively attract interagency talent; expand partnerships with
      the national labs; increase access to data and data analysis
      tools, including the acquisition of proprietary datasets and
      modern data analytic systems; and hire additional agents
      and analysts for the Office of Export Enforcement.
    • Amend the Export Control Reform Act to require that within
      30 days of granting a license for export to entities on the
      Entity List, including under the Foreign Direct Product Rule,
      BIS shall provide all relevant information about the license
      approval to the relevant congressional committees, subject to
      restrictions on further disclosure under 50 U.S.C. § 4820(h)(2)
      (B)(ii).
    • Direct the president to:
      ○ Designate a senior official to coordinate efforts across the
         Administration to prioritize bilateral and multilateral sup-
         port for U.S. export control initiatives; and
      ○ Establish a Joint Interagency Task Force, reporting to and
         overseen by the national security advisor and with its own
         budget and staff, to assess ways to achieve the goal of lim-
         iting China’s access to and development of advanced tech-
         nologies that pose a national security risk to the United
         States. The task force should include designees from the
         U.S. Departments of Commerce, Defense, State, Treasury,
         and Energy; the intelligence community; and other rele-
         vant agencies. It should assess the effectiveness of existing
         export controls; provide advice on designing new controls
         and/or using other tools to maximize their effect while min-
         imizing their negative impact on U.S. and allied economies;
         and recommend new authorities, institutions, or interna-
         tional arrangements in light of the long-term importance
         of U.S.-China technology competition.
    • Codify the “Securing the Information and Communications
      Technology and Services Supply Chain” Executive Order to
      ensure that as the authority is used more robustly, challenges
      to its status as an executive order will not constrain BIS’s
      implementation decisions or delay implementation.
17. Congress direct the Administration to create an Outbound In-
    vestment Office within the executive branch to oversee invest-
    ments into countries of concern, including China. The office
    should have a dedicated staff and appropriated resources and
    be tasked with:
    • Prohibiting outbound U.S. investment through a sector-based
      approach in technologies the United States has identified as
      a threat to its national or economic security;
    • Expanding the list of covered sectors with the goal of aligning
      outbound investment restrictions with export controls. The of-
      fice should identify and refine the list of covered technologies
      in coordination with appropriate agencies as new innovations
      emerge; and
                                 738

    • Developing a broader mandatory notification program for
       sectors where investment is not prohibited to allow policy-
       makers to accumulate visibility needed to identify potential
       high-risk investments and other sectors that pose a threat
       to U.S. national or economic security. In addition to direct
       investments, the notification regime should capture passive
       investment flows to help inform debates around the expan-
       sion of prohibitions to cover portfolio investment.
18. Congress repeal Permanent Normal Trade Relations (PNTR) for
    China. The PNTR status allows China to benefit from the same
    trade terms as U.S. allies, despite engaging in practices such as
    intellectual property theft and market manipulation. Repealing
    PNTR could reintroduce annual reviews of China’s trade prac-
    tices, giving the United States more leverage to address unfair
    trade behaviors. This move would signal a shift toward a more
    assertive trade policy aimed at protecting U.S. industries and
    workers from economic coercion.
19. Congress direct relevant departments and agencies to expand
    their data collection and transparency initiatives into the vol-
    ume and types of investment flowing into China by taking the
    following actions:
    • Amending the International Investment and Trade in Ser-
       vices Survey Act to require the Bureau of Economic Analysis
       within the U.S. Department of Commerce to publish more
       detailed sectoral breakdowns of U.S. direct investment in
       China on a nationality basis and the U.S. Department of the
       Treasury to publish annual sector breakdowns of U.S. portfo-
       lio investment in China on a nationality basis. The portfolio
       investment sectors should be more specific than those provid-
       ed by the Commerce Department for direct investment. Ad-
       ditionally, Congress should require the Treasury Department
       to publish quarterly updates—without sector breakdowns—of
       nationality-based portfolio investment in China.
    • Requiring the U.S. Department of Commerce to produce a
       report on the feasibility and methodology for publishing na-
       tionality-based results for direct investment, where offshore
       tax havens and locales of incorporation would not be said to
       receive hundreds of billions of dollars and true destinations
       of the capital would be accurately identified.
20. Congress direct the Administration to impose sanctions on Chi-
    nese financial institutions that violate sanctions, including those
    that are proven to be working with or supporting the Russian
    military industrial base or facilitating purchases of Iranian oil.
21. In light of the periodic and increasingly frequent removal of
    some of these materials from Chinese websites, Congress direct
    the executive branch to fund the creation and operation of a
    regularly updated, permanent data archive, in effect a series
    of snapshots of portions of the Chinese internet. In the past
    decade, foreign analysts have made use of open source Chi-
    nese-language materials to gain insight into various aspects of
    current policy as well as internal (but unclassified) discussions
                                739

    of future military, diplomatic, and economic strategy. Informa-
    tion would be stored in the permanent data archive, accessible
    to both government and private analysts.
22. Congress consider legislation to set priorities and goals for
    U.S.-China economic relations. These policy priorities and goals
    should include:
    • Updating existing trade and economic tools to ensure their
       timely application, utility, and effectiveness in countering
       China’s non-market economic policies;
    • Limiting U.S. economic and security dependence on supply
       chains in critical and emerging products, technologies, and
       services provided by companies controlled, operating in, or
       subject to the influence of China;
    • Enhancing the accountability of the executive branch to Con-
       gress and increasing the transparency of its actions to ensure
       coordinated governmental action and respect for Congress’s
       constitutional Article I, Section 8 authority;
    • Prioritizing domestic production and employment while also
       recognizing the need, as appropriate, to coordinate and align
       policies with friends and allies;
    • Acting to address production overcapacity fueled by Chinese
       policies and actions; and
    • Advancing the resilience of the U.S. economy and ensuring its
       access to key inputs and technologies.
23. Congress pass legislation eliminating the ability of entities
    operating in U.S. Foreign-Trade Zones (FTZs) to qualify for
    zero or lower tariffs on products imported from China or Chi-
    nese-affiliated or -invested entities into the FTZ and then re-
    exported.
24. The relevant committees of Congress hold hearings to assess
    the desirability and feasibility of creating a trade defense co-
    alition with other like-minded countries to forestall the risk
    of a second China shock. Such a grouping would seek to align
    policies for responding to the recent acceleration in China’s ex-
    ports of subsidized, underpriced materials and manufactured
    goods.
Chapter 7: China’s New Measures for Control, Mobilization,
    and Resilience
The Commission recommends:
25. Congress direct the Office of the Director of National Intelli-
    gence, within 180 days, to conduct a classified assessment, and
    brief its findings to Congress, of the intelligence community’s
    (IC) ability to accurately monitor strategic, nonmilitary indi-
    cators that would signal that China is preparing for immi-
    nent conflict and the extent to which China’s increasing lack
    of transparency affects the IC’s ability to monitor this infor-
    mation. The assessment should include, but not be limited to,
    the following:
                                740

    • The IC’s ability to monitor:
      ○ China’s energy storage locations and stockpiling rates, par-
         ticularly for crude oil, coal, and natural gas;
      ○ Production shifts from civilian to military industries;
      ○ China’s national defense mobilization system; and
      ○ China’s strategic reserves and their compositions and lo-
         cations;
    • The IC’s ability to coordinate with non-Title 10 and -Title 50
      federal agencies that have technical expertise in agriculture
      and trade to monitor China’s food and energy stockpiling and
      any derived indicators that may signal a potential prepara-
      tion for conflict;
    • Whether the IC’s current geospatial intelligence posture is
      adequate to compensate for the loss of open source informa-
      tion from China; and
    • The desirability and feasibility of establishing an Energy
      Strategic Warning system involving coordination between rel-
      evant entities including the National Geospatial-Intelligence
      Agency and the U.S. Departments of Energy, Commerce,
      State, and the Treasury.
Chapter 8: China’s Evolving Counter-Intervention Capabilities
    and the Role of Indo-Pacific Allies
The Commission recommends:
26. Congress direct the U.S. Department of Defense to produce
    within 60 days a classified net assessment report on current
    People’s Liberation Army (PLA) Command, Control, Communi-
    cations, Computers Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnais-
    sance (C4ISR) capabilities and PLA electronic warfare (EW) ca-
    pabilities (including electronic attack and electronic protection
    capabilities). The report should examine U.S. counter-C4ISR
    and counter-EW capabilities, assess the resiliency of U.S. capa-
    bilities, identify counter-C4ISR and counter-EW gaps, and pro-
    vide a menu of procurement options to close the gaps. Not later
    than 60 days after its completion, the U.S. secretary of defense
    shall provide the report to the appropriate congressional com-
    mittees and brief them on its findings.
27. Congress direct the Office of the Director of National Intelli-
    gence, in conjunction with the U.S. Departments of Defense,
    Commerce, and the Treasury, and other relevant agencies, to
    conduct a comprehensive review of potential technological
    chokepoints across the People’s Republic of China military in-
    dustrial base and devise plans to apply controls, in conjunction
    with allies, to slow China’s military development.
28. Congress reinvigorate and recommit to space as an area of
    strategic competition, including by conducting a review of the
    commercial space industry to determine if there are regulatory
    updates that would ensure that the U.S. commercial space in-
    dustry is able to innovate as quickly as possible while maintain-
    ing safety as a top priority.
                                  741

             Part IV: Taiwan and Hong Kong
Chapter 9: Taiwan
The Commission recommends:
29. Congress amend the Arms Export Control Act of 1976 to include
    Taiwan on the list of “NATO Plus” recipients.
30. Congress create a “Taiwan Allies Fund” that would provide
    foreign assistance only to countries that have an official diplo-
    matic relationship with Taiwan. No country could receive more
    than 15 percent of the appropriated funding each year. Coun-
    tries that no longer have a diplomatic relationship with Taiwan
    would immediately be ineligible for this funding.
Chapter 10: Hong Kong
The Commission recommends:
31. Congress require the Administration to produce a determina-
    tion whether reasonable grounds exist for concluding that the
    Hong Kong Special Administrative Region should be designated
    as a Primary Money Laundering Concern (PMLC) jurisdiction
    under Section 311 of the Patriot Act due to its growing role as
    the central sanctions evasion hub and transshipment center for
    illicit finance and technology to Russia, Iran, and North Korea.
32. Congress direct the U.S. Department of the Treasury, in coor-
    dination with the U.S. Departments of State and Commerce,
    to provide the relevant congressional committees a report as-
    sessing the ability of U.S. and foreign financial institutions
    operating in Hong Kong to identify and prevent transactions
    that facilitate the transfer of products, technology, and money
    to Russia, Iran, and other sanctioned countries and entities in
    violation of U.S. export controls, financial sanctions, and related
    rules. The report should:
    • Evaluate the extent of Hong Kong’s role in facilitating the
       transfer of products and technologies to Russia, Iran, other
       adversary countries, and the Mainland, which are prohibited
       by export controls from being transferred to such countries;
    • Evaluate Hong Kong’s role in facilitating trade and financial
       transactions that violate U.S. sanctions on Russia, Iran, and
       other countries and entities subject to U.S. financial sanctions;
    • Examine whether Hong Kong’s National Security Law has
       limited the ability of financial institutions to adhere to global
       standards for anti-money laundering and know-your-custom-
       er procedures; and
    • Describe the level of cooperation between Hong Kong and
       U.S. authorities in enforcing export controls and sanctions
       regimes.
