                            PART II
    TECHNOLOGY AND CONSUMER
 PRODUCT OPPORTUNITIES AND RISKS
    CHAPTER 3: U.S.-CHINA COMPETITION IN
         EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
Abstract
  The United States is locked in a long-term strategic competition
with China to shape the rapidly evolving global technological land-
scape. Innovation in emerging technologies could transform society,
create new industries, foster new dependencies, and alter the char-
acter of warfare. Whichever country secures a lead in key technol-
ogies—particularly those with first mover advantages—will tip the
balance of power in its favor and reap economic benefits far into the
21st century. China under General Secretary of the Chinese Commu-
nist Party (CCP) Xi Jinping has recognized the potential advantages
of seizing the innovation “high ground” in this competition and has
aggressively designed, implemented, and funded programs to domi-
nate technologies of the future. In doing so, Beijing hopes its efforts
will underpin national rejuvenation, making the country powerful,
self-sufficient, and impervious to perceived technological “contain-
ment” from the United States and its allies and partners. China
has focused on developing emerging technologies such as artificial
intelligence (AI), quantum technologies, biotechnology, and battery
energy storage systems. The United States has similarly realized
the importance of technology competition with China and has sig-
nificantly altered the policy environment around key technologies,
particularly semiconductors, advanced computing, and clean energy.
China faces many challenges, including these U.S. policies, a falter-
ing domestic economy, and inefficiencies inherent in its state-direct-
ed innovation system. However, if China manages to overcome these
challenges, its rapid technological progress threatens U.S. economic
and military leadership and may erode deterrence and stability in
the Pacific, as well as tip the global balance of power.
Key Findings
  • The CCP is prioritizing research in key emerging technolo-
    gy areas such as AI, quantum technology, biotechnology, and
    batteries with the goal of becoming a world leader in science
    and technology. Xi is placing a bet that China’s investments
    in high-tech industries will unleash “new quality productive
    forces,” transcend an old growth model reliant on infrastruc-
    ture and lower-technology exports, and help China to achieve
                                 (169)
                               170

  its goal of becoming a superpower in the 21st century. Chi-
  na’s focus on emerging technologies is also motivated by its
  desire to attain self-sufficiency in what its leaders describe as
  “chokepoint” technologies amid an international environment
  they perceive as increasingly hostile and to better prepare for
  a potential conflict with the United States over Taiwan or in
  other contingencies.
• China’s state-centric approach and heavy investments in do-
  mestic innovation reflect similar techno-nationalist initiatives
  dating back to the Mao Zedong era. Under Xi, these efforts have
  intensified as the Party has sought to impose tighter top-down
  control in the innovation ecosystem to make breaking depen-
  dencies on foreign technologies a focal point.
• The United States and China are neck-and-neck, with one being
  ahead or behind depending on the specific critical and emerging
  technology. On certain manufacturing-intensive technologies,
  like advanced batteries and electric vehicles (EVs), China’s var-
  ious efforts have enabled its companies to obtain a clear advan-
  tage.
• Artificial intelligence: China is making rapid advancements
  and noteworthy investments in its AI capabilities. It is devel-
  oping AI not only to advance China’s economic growth more
  broadly but also for military applications, such as autonomous
  unmanned systems, data processing, decision-making, and cog-
  nitive warfare. Across key aspects of AI competition, however,
  China is having mixed success.
  ○ Advanced semiconductors: The United States and
     like-minded countries currently have an advantage in the ad-
     vanced semiconductors needed to power AI technologies. Chi-
     na is aggressively working to address this deficit.
  ○ Compute and cloud: The United States leads in total com-
     pute and cloud, but several Chinese companies have notable
     cloud capabilities. Further, the nature of cloud computing cre-
     ates a heightened threat of “leakage” into China of advanced
     compute capabilities located outside of China.
  ○ AI models: The United States currently leads the world in
     developing robust AI models, but China is pursuing numer-
     ous government-led and ostensibly private efforts to develop
     advanced AI models.
  ○ Data: Data are critical to AI capabilities. Each country has
     certain advantages in terms of collection, use, and availability
     of data for AI systems. China understands the value of data
     to AI and has taken active measures to increase the availabil-
     ity of quality data within its AI ecosystem.
• Quantum technologies: Both the United States and China are
  heavily funding research in quantum computing, sensing, and
  communications, the three subdomains that together make up
  quantum information science (QIS). While QIS is still in an ear-
  ly stage of development, it will have significant competitive and
  military impacts if it becomes commercially viable. China’s Par-
                                 171

    ty-state drives quantum research through support to a major
    state laboratory in Anhui Province as well as a growing roster
    of state-backed startup companies. China appears to be an early
    leader in quantum communications, launching the world’s first
    quantum communications satellite and connecting two ground
    stations with quantum key distribution. In other areas, Chi-
    na appears to be lagging behind the United States, though its
    scientists have claimed breakthroughs in cracking encrypted
    communications systems and developing advanced radar tech-
    nology, claims that are difficult to confirm.
  • Biotechnology: Biotechnology is another key emerging technol-
    ogy with the potential for transforming many industries. Chi-
    na aims to use biotechnologies to make itself less dependent
    on U.S. agriculture while embedding Chinese firms in U.S. food
    production and supply chains in genomic, pharmaceutical, and
    other biotechnologies. The major research and market presence
    of Chinese genomic and biotech services companies in the Unit-
    ed States gives these companies access to key technologies and
    data.
  • Advanced batteries: China has attained a sizable advantage
    at each stage of the battery supply chain, ushering in rapid
    global market share increases for Chinese EV and battery mak-
    ers. China’s near monopoly on battery manufacturing creates
    dependencies for U.S. auto manufacturers reliant on upstream
    suppliers as well as potential latent threats to U.S. critical in-
    frastructure from the ongoing installation of Chinese-made bat-
    tery energy storage systems throughout U.S. electrical grids and
    backup systems for industrial users.
Recommendations
The Commission recommends:
 • Congress establish and fund a Manhattan Project-like program
    dedicated to racing to and acquiring an Artificial General In-
    telligence (AGI) capability. AGI is generally defined as systems
    that are as good as or better than human capabilities across
    all cognitive domains and would surpass the sharpest human
    minds at every task. Among the specific actions the Commission
    recommends for Congress:
   ○ Provide broad multiyear contracting authority to the execu-
      tive branch and associated funding for leading artificial in-
      telligence, cloud, and data center companies and others to
      advance the stated policy at a pace and scale consistent with
      the goal of U.S. AGI leadership; and
   ○ Direct the U.S. secretary of defense to provide a Defense Pri-
      orities and Allocations System “DX Rating” to items in the
      artificial intelligence ecosystem to ensure this project receives
      national priority.
 • Congress consider legislation to:
   ○ Require prior approval and ongoing oversight of Chinese in-
      volvement in biotechnology companies engaged in operations
                               172

     in the United States, including research or other related
     transactions. Such approval and oversight operations shall
     be conducted by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
     Services in consultation with other appropriate governmental
     entities. In identifying the involvement of Chinese entities or
     interests in the U.S. biotechnology sector, Congress should in-
     clude firms and persons:
      Engaged in genomic research;
      Evaluating and/or reporting on genetic data, including for
        medical or therapeutic purposes or ancestral documenta-
        tion;
      Participating in pharmaceutical development;
      Involved with U.S. colleges and universities; and
      Involved with federal, state, or local governments or agen-
        cies and departments.
  ○ Support significant Federal Government investments in bio-
     technology in the United States and with U.S. entities at
     every level of the technology development cycle and supply
     chain, from basic research through product development and
     market deployment, including investments in intermediate
     services capacity and equipment manufacturing capacity.
• To protect U.S. economic and national security interests, Con-
  gress consider legislation to restrict or ban the importation of
  certain technologies and services controlled by Chinese entities,
  including:
  ○ Autonomous humanoid robots with advanced capabilities of
     (i) dexterity, (ii) locomotion, and (iii) intelligence; and
  ○ Energy infrastructure products that involve remote servic-
     ing, maintenance, or monitoring capabilities, such as load
     balancing and other batteries supporting the electrical
     grid, batteries used as backup systems for industrial facil-
     ities and/or critical infrastructure, and transformers and
     associated equipment.
• Congress encourage the Administration’s ongoing rulemaking
  efforts regarding “connected vehicles” to cover industrial ma-
  chinery, Internet of Things devices, appliances, and other con-
  nected devices produced by Chinese entities or including Chi-
  nese technologies that can be accessed, serviced, maintained, or
  updated remotely or through physical updates.
• Congress enact legislation prohibiting granting seats on boards
  of directors and information rights to China-based investors in
  strategic technology sectors. Allowing foreign investors to hold
  seats and observer seats on the boards of U.S. technology start-
  ups provides them with sensitive strategic information, which
  could be leveraged to gain competitive advantages. Prohibiting
  this practice would protect intellectual property and ensure that
  U.S. technological advances are not compromised. It would also
  reduce the risk of corporate espionage, safeguarding America’s
  leadership in emerging technologies.
                                 173

 • Congress establish that:
   ○ The U.S. government will unilaterally or with key interna-
     tional partners seek to vertically integrate in the develop-
     ment and commercialization of quantum technology.
   ○ Federal Government investments in quantum technology sup-
     port every level of the technology development cycle and sup-
     ply chain from basic research through product development
     and market deployment, including investments in intermedi-
     ate services capacity.
   ○ The Office of Science and Technology Policy, in consultation
     with appropriate agencies and experts, develop a Quantum
     Technology Supply Chain Roadmap to ensure that the United
     States coordinates outbound investment, U.S. critical supply
     chain assessments, the activities of the Committee on Foreign
     Investment in the United States (CFIUS), and federally sup-
     ported research activities to ensure that the United States,
     along with key allies and partners, will lead in this critical
     technology and not advance Chinese capabilities and devel-
     opment.
Introduction
   This chapter examines U.S.-China technology competition from
the standpoint of economic and national security. Beijing hopes its
efforts to gain leadership in emerging technology will underpin na-
tional rejuvenation, making the country powerful, self-sufficient,
and impervious to perceived technological “containment” from the
United States and its allies and partners.1 This chapter first pro-
vides context, noting a recent shift in U.S. policy across multiple
administrations to address the challenges of technology competition
with China and China’s efforts to lead in key technologies. It then
focuses on U.S.-China technology competition in four key emerging
technology areas: AI, QIS, biotechnology, and advanced battery tech-
nology. For each technology, the chapter highlights commercial and
national security implications of the technology, compares relative
capabilities of China and the United States, examines China’s poli-
cies and investments, and analyzes China’s exploration of such tech-
nologies for military and national security uses. Lastly, the chapter
discusses the implications of U.S.-China technology competition for
the national security and economic prosperity of the United States.
The chapter draws on the Commission’s February 2024 hearing on
“Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Economic and
National Security Competition,” consultations with experts, and
open source research and analysis.
Securing U.S. Advantage in Emerging Technologies
   The policy environment around U.S.-China technology compe-
tition has shifted significantly. For years, Chinese companies and
the Party-state have sought to acquire U.S. cutting-edge technolo-
gy, intellectual property (IP), and know-how through licit and illicit
means. For much of that time, outside of narrow export controls and
occasional foreign investment reviews, U.S. policy was inadequate-
ly responsive to China’s technology policies and ambitions. A large
                                 174

constraint on technology transfer to China in many areas came from
the reluctance of U.S. companies to transfer their best technology to
China out of concerns over IP theft rather than U.S. law.2 In recent
years, however, successive administrations and Congress have iden-
tified emerging technologies as central to the U.S.-China strategic
competition.
   As attitudes in the United States have shifted, the United States
has taken a number of steps in recent years to better protect U.S.
national security and shore up U.S. advantages in the development,
production, and protection of these technologies. U.S. policymakers
have identified certain “critical and emerging technologies” or “foun-
dational” technologies as vital to economic and national security,
including advanced semiconductors, quantum information systems,
and AI; biotechnologies and biomanufacturing; and clean energy
generation and storage technology.3 Each of these families of tech-
nologies carries the potential to be a “force multiplier” across the
various fields of technology, accelerating the broader pace of innova-
tion and adoption, and serving as a bedrock upon which to ground
future industries.4 Each also has significant national security im-
plications.
   U.S. policy has begun to shift to recognize the importance of com-
petition with China over these critical technologies. In recent years,
the United States has made investments to help ensure it retains
an edge in key foundational technologies; it has also expanded use
of export controls relating to advanced semiconductors and AI and
tightened up other avenues that adversaries use to gain access to
sensitive U.S. technology. Now that U.S. policymakers have realized
the stakes, U.S.-China technology competition will continue to be a
key issue in the U.S.-China economic and security policy space for
years to come.
China Has Long Sought Dominance in Emerging
   Technologies
  China has long sought to spur domestic science and technology
innovation to enhance its military and commercial progress, but it
is intensifying its efforts in light of disruptive global events and
heightened competition with the United States. China is seeking
to dominate emerging technology industries to sustain economic
growth as traditional sectors atrophy and to exert greater global
influence via the trade and economic leverage that come with these
technologies.
  The CCP has clearly articulated and publicly stated its priorities
in emerging technologies, and it leverages a variety of assets to di-
rect attention, effort, and resources toward these priorities. In con-
trast to the more market-oriented innovation landscape in the Unit-
ed States, the state takes on a much more prominent role in China’s
technology ecosystem, with the government strategically allocating
funding and resources to industries and research areas deemed a
priority.5 The results of abundant and sustained state support have
been mixed, creating expected inefficiencies commonly associated
with centrally planned economies and yet also enabling tremendous
returns to scale for fledgling industries that have resulted in clear
comparative advantages for Chinese producers of certain technolo-
                                             175

gies.6 Despite the traction of some of these efforts, China faces chal-
lenges, including a shortage of highly skilled workers and economic
headwinds.7 Additionally, while China has increased its scientific
research and patent output, translating these findings into ground-
breaking innovations and economic benefits remains a hurdle.8
   China under the CCP has a long history of techno-nationalism, of-
ten rooted in fear of being dominated by technologically superior for-
eign powers.9 For example, China successfully developed the atomic
bomb in 1964 through “Project 596,” a national initiative that aimed
to build nuclear weapons.10 Similar national innovation programs
have been used to achieve advancement in targeted technology ar-
eas, such as the National High-Tech R&D Program (863 Program)
established in 1986 and the National Basic Research Program (973
Program) established in 1997.11 These large government-funded
initiatives channeled financing and resources to scientists and en-
trepreneurs credited with producing the world’s first quantum tele-
phone network, improved solar technology, and the Tianhe-1A su-
percomputer, which for a time was the world’s fastest computer.12
   In the mid-2000s, China made explicit its intention to use technol-
ogy policy to move up the value chain of global production, increase
its indigenous capacity, and become a global leader in certain tech-
nology areas. The 2006 Medium- to Long-Term Program (MLP) for
the Development of Science and Technology articulated the need to
facilitate indigenous innovation and set specific goals to be achieved
by 2020. These included targets in research and development (R&D)
spending, patent filing, and publication of academic articles.13 Chi-
na implemented numerous policies under the MLP in the ensuing
years, many of which ran counter to the letter and spirit of WTO
rules.14
Techno-Nationalism Accelerates under Xi
   General Secretary Xi has continued—and in recent years, accel-
erated—these techno-nationalist policies, focusing efforts on tech-
nologies he believes are transformative and can propel China into
dominance this century by leapfrogging the United States. Seek-
ing to accelerate progress under the MLP, in 2015, China rolled
out “Made in China (MIC) 2025,” a more comprehensive industri-
al policy intended to improve manufacturing processes and achieve
breakthroughs in ten high-value sectors.* 15 MIC set ambitious do-
mestic market share targets in the identified priority sectors for
Chinese-made products, including 80 percent for EVs and batteries,
70 percent for industrial robotics, and 40 percent for mobile phone
chips.16 The South China Morning Post claimed in April 2024 that
86 percent of these targets had been met or exceeded.17
   Xi has doubled down on the state-centric approach in order to
seize the “high ground” of innovation, rhetorically highlighting its
importance and promulgating further iterations to industrial poli-
cy.18 In speeches and policy documents, Xi and other top Chinese
  * The ten high-value sectors highlighted in Made in China 2025 are advanced railway trans-
portation equipment, aerospace, agricultural machines, biopharma and high-tech medical devices,
energy equipment, high-end computerized machines and robots, maritime equipment and high-
tech ships, new energy and energy-saving vehicles, new generation information technology, and
new materials. Karen M. Sutter, “ ‘Made in China 2025’ Industrial Policies: Issues for Congress,”
Congressional Research Service IF10964, March 10, 2023.
                                               176

leaders have emphasized the need to reduce reliance on so-called
“chokepoint” technologies, particularly those controlled by Western
countries, by achieving breakthroughs in domestic innovation and
developing alternative sources of supply.* 19 In March 2023, the
State Council asserted that global competition and external “con-
tainment” necessitated the acceleration of “high-level scientific and
technological self-reliance and self-improvement.” 20
   China’s 14th Five-Year Plan (2021–2025) built on previous ini-
tiatives to advance high-priority sectors like AI, QIS, biotechnolo-
gy, and advanced batteries.21 It also indicated a response to what
the CCP perceives as an increasingly hostile and disruptive global
environment by incorporating the “dual-circulation” † development
model and placing an emphasis on obtaining foreign technologies
through pathways that remain open, such as research partnerships,
establishing R&D centers abroad, and providing incentives for tech-
nological talent to work in China.22
   More recently, Xi has introduced the concept of “new quality pro-
ductive forces,” which the National People’s Congress elevated as
its top policy priority during its annual meeting in March 2024 and
adopted at the Third Plenum held a few months later in July.23
This slogan, now being widely disseminated in Chinese political
discourse, indicates that China is focusing its state-led economic ef-
forts to enhance competitiveness in emerging technologies like AI
and clean energy to ensure continued economic growth and global
economic leverage through dominance in key technologies of the fu-
ture.24 In doing so, China hopes to eclipse the United States across
the full spectrum of national power.25
   Under Xi, the CCP regime has also moved to assert greater con-
trol over science and technology innovation efforts, aiming to en-
hance Party control and ensure alignment with Party priorities.26
After the reform and opening up era in the 1980s, China facilitat-
ed research and capital linkages through a system of hundreds of
publicly funded laboratories—often integrated into universities and
private companies—and by clustering research facilities and busi-
nesses in development zones.27 This decentralized approach was
intended to harness private efforts and allow for localized policy
experimentation.28 In 2016, the Party under Xi moved to reform
the system of state labs and development zones under the “Innova-
   * While publicly available official policy documents describe “key and core technologies” con-
trolled by “others” as an area of concern, Chinese leadership rarely delineates these technologies.
In a 2021 speech before the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xi called on the scientific community
to “resolutely win the battle over key core technologies” by focusing efforts on basic research that
can “break through bottlenecks” and “understand the basic theories and technical principles of
‘chokepoint’ technologies.” In 2018, the Chinese state media newspaper Science and Technology
Daily published a list of 35 chokepoint technologies reviewed and approved by the Ministry of
Science and Technology, among them machinery to fabricate semiconductors such as photo-li-
thography machines and vacuum evaporators, specialized steel alloys, and aviation software. Ben
Murphy, “Chokepoints: China’s Self-Identified Strategic Technology Import Dependencies,” Center
for Security and Emerging Technology, May 2022, 1, 3; Xi Jinping, “Accelerate the Construction of
a Scientific and Technological Power to Achieve High-Level Scientific and Technological Self-Re-
liance and Self Improvement” (习近平:加快建设科技强国 实现高水平科技自立自强), Qiushi, April
30, 2022. Translation.
   † Dual circulation consists of achieving a largely self-reliant domestic economy by relying on the
production base and massive consumer market to vertically integrate important industries, while
simultaneously deepening dependencies on Chinese high-quality exports around the world. Karen
M. Sutter and Michael D. Sutherland, “China’s 14th Five-Year Plan: A First Look,” Congressional
Research Service IF11684, January 5, 2021; Center for Strategic and International Studies, “Will
the Dual Circulation Strategy Enable China to Compete in a Post-Pandemic World?” December
15, 2021.
                                             177

tion-Driven Development Strategy.” 29 A key objective of this strat-
egy is to consolidate what was determined to be a fragmented in-
novation landscape with an overabundance of research funding for
underperforming efforts into higher-performing equivalent institu-
tions more directly controlled by the CCP and focused on achieving
self-sufficiency in key “bottleneck” technologies.30 In March 2023,
China also announced plans to restructure its Ministry of Science
and Technology to reduce its responsibilities and centralize Party
control through the establishment of a decision-making body called
the Central Commission on Science and Technology.31
Funding Mechanisms Buttress China’s Science and
     Technology Ambitions
   The United States has long led the world in both public and pri-
vate sector funding for R&D,* though China is closing the gap. The
Chinese government has prioritized R&D funding to accelerate its
ambitions to innovate in science and technology and better compete
with the United States.32 According to data from the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) that compare
R&D spending across countries using purchasing power parity, in
2021 the United States continues to outpace China on total R&D,
spending $806 billion (3.46 percent of gross domestic product [GDP])
compared to China’s $667.6 billion (2.43 percent of GDP).33 In this
dataset, government funding represented roughly 20 percent of to-
tal R&D spending in both countries.34 However, a 2023 estimate
from Rhodium Group found that approximately 60 percent of all fi-
nancing within China’s science and technology ecosystem came from
government-related sources of funding after accounting for tax in-
centives and off-budget financing, distinguishing it from other large
and technologically advanced economies.35 In total dollars spent,
U.S. multinational enterprises in high-tech industries spent 240
percent more on R&D than Chinese firms in 2021, spending $529
billion and $154 billion, respectively.36 However, when adjusted for
wage differences, U.S. companies only spent 80 percent more than
their Chinese counterparts.37 In her written testimony before the
Commission, Ngor Luong, a senior research analyst at the Center
for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET), noted that in 2022
the Chinese National Bureau of Statistics reported that the coun-
try’s R&D investment increased by 10 percent from 2021, outpacing
its goal of 7 percent annual increases outlined in the 14th Five-Year
Plan.38
   In addition to direct government funding, traditionally, China
has utilized an array of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) to direct
  * R&D is typically subdivided into three components: (1) basic research, which is experimental
or theoretical and attempts to generate new knowledge devoid of a particular application; (2)
applied research, which seeks to acquire new knowledge that can be directed toward a practical
objective; and (3) experimental development, which is the systematic approach to utilize knowl-
edge gained through research to produce new products or services or improve existing products
or services. Together, basic research and applied research comprise “fundamental research.” In
medical and life sciences, the more common term “translational research,” sometimes used syn-
onymously with applied research, is the process of moving discoveries from basic research into
medical applications for patients and populations. National Institutes of Health, “About Trans-
lational Science,” April 19, 2024; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, “Re-
search and Development (R&D),” 2024; Marco Zarbin, “What Constitutes Translational Research?
Implications for the Scope of Translational Vision Science and Technology,” Translational Vision
Science & Technology, July 14, 2020; U.S. Department of Defense, Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency, Fundamental Research.
                                            178

capital to key sectors and advance national innovation goals. Chi-
na’s Minister of Science and Technology Wang Zhigang has called
on SOEs to be “pillars” in the country’s whole-of-nation approach
to achieve self-sufficiency and high-technology innovation.39 China’s
state-owned banks have been instrumental in directing capital to
national priorities, exemplified by six state-owned investors together
providing one-third of the investment in the latest $47 billion semi-
conductor fund alongside other SOEs and the Ministry of Finance.40
China’s central government is expected to continue to provide robust
support to SOEs involved in national security priorities, including
aerospace and defense and policy banks, while support for those in
disfavored sectors, such as real estate and even consumer goods, is
less assured.41 Beyond providing funding, SOEs have been directed
to increase their own levels of R&D spending and seek opportunities
to integrate more agile high-tech small and medium enterprises into
their supply chains.42
   Beijing also uses government guidance funds—public-private
funding mechanisms that blend state capital with Chinese private
equity and venture capital—to steer capital toward strategic indus-
tries such as AI.43 However, Ms. Luong, along with research fellow
Zachary Arnold and Chinese translation manager Ben Murphy at
CSET, find that in practice “most guidance funds fail to live up to
their ambitions, weakened by unrealistic goals, bureaucratic con-
straints, incompetent management, risk aversion, and a lack of mar-
ket discipline.” 44
The Reshaping of Beijing’s Innovation Drive to Utilize Small
     and Medium-Sized Enterprises
   Over the past decade, China has pivoted its innovation-oriented
policies to refocus on supporting small and medium-sized (SMEs),
developing a whole-of-nation approach to fostering small but highly
innovative firms. As emphasized in 2023 by Premier Li Qiang, Bei-
jing now believes that “supporting early tech startups should be a
top priority.” 45 This shift reflects both Beijing’s acknowledgement
of the success of “hidden” champions * in China’s startup ecosystem
and its desire to curtail the “disorderly expansion of capital,” seek-
ing to avoid what the Party-state viewed as an excessive concen-
tration of investment in e-platforms, including services like video
gaming and online tutoring.46
   The Little Giants program, officially launched in 2018, forms
the core of Beijing’s efforts to develop a multi-tiered system to
help SMEs compete in emerging technologies or occupy niche but
critical segments of global supply chains.47 The Ministry of Indus-
try and Information Technology (MIIT) certified the first batch of
companies as “Little Giants” in 2019, and tens of thousands of
SMEs have since received support from the initiative.48 This sys-
tem encompasses a broad array of tools to foster innovation, from
direct subsidies to initiatives enhancing SME-university collabo-
ration.49 However, the most important element is the broadened
  * Technology analyst Dan Wang argues that many outside observers underestimate China’s
innovation capacity in part due to China’s innovative firms being concentrated in “less flashy”
manufacturing capabilities and products sold at lower price points in lower-income countries.
Dan Wang, “China’s Hidden Tech Revolution: How Beijing Threatens U.S. Dominance,” Foreign
Affairs, February 28, 2023.
                                            179

access to capital markets for Little Giants.50 SMEs have histori-
cally struggled to access financing within China’s bank-dominat-
ed financial system where lenders prioritize credit to SOEs and
large non-state firms.51 This acts as a barrier to innovation for
many non-state enterprises, one that Beijing aims to ameliorate
through the Little Giants program.52
   China has created a series of new financing mechanisms over
the past several years for small firms operating in priority in-
dustries, with varying degrees of success. In 2019, the Shang-
hai-based Science and Technology Innovation Board, or STAR
Market, was launched to expand equity investment in smaller
Chinese technology companies.53 The exchange hosts over 500
companies with a combined market cap of $716.7 billion as of
June 2024, and it predominately fast-tracks initial public of-
ferings (IPOs) for companies in high-tech fields, including new
materials, biomedicine, and information technology.54 The STAR
Market initially outperformed China’s other major indices, but
as of August 2024 it has fallen 59.7 percent since its peak in
July 2020.55 Following lackluster performance of the index in
recent years, the China Securities Regulatory Commission has
since raised the requirements for companies seeking to list.56 The
Beijing Stock Exchange also opened in 2021 for even smaller en-
terprises (with a minimum market value of $30 million, relative
to the $140 million required to list on the STAR Market).57 Little
Giants accounted for around 40 percent of listings across all stock
exchanges in China in 2022.58
   Additionally, China is guiding its banking sector to provide easy
access to credit, with the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) creating
a special purpose lending facility that enables innovative SMEs in
science and technology areas to refinance loans well below market
rates.59 At the end of 2023, total lending to sci-tech SMEs reached
$340 billion (renminbi [RMB] 2.45 trillion),* an increase of 21.9
percent relative to 2022 and outpacing overall loan growth by 11.8
percentage points.60 Leaderdrive, a non-state SME that produces
components for industrial robots, is an illustrative example of the
financial support firms gain access to under the program.61 After
it was awarded the Little Giant title in 2019, Leaderdrive benefit-
ed from both government guidance fund investments and a listing
on the STAR Market in 2020.62 Large domestic industrial robotics
manufacturers also provide a source of ongoing demand for Leader-
drive’s production.63

Case Studies in U.S.-China Technology Competition
   Both the United States and China view AI, QIS, biotechnology, and
advanced battery technology as some of the key strategic emerging
industries of the future.64 As outlined in the 14th Five Year Plan
(2021–2025), China views these technologies as integral to strength-
ening its national defense in tandem with driving innovation.65 The
following sections will assess U.S.-China technology competition in
these four technologies.
  * Unless noted otherwise, this section uses the following exchange rate throughout: $1 = RMB
7.25.
                                              180

Artificial Intelligence: A Revolutionary Technology with
      Significant Military Implications
   In the broader geostrategic competition between the United States
and China, leadership in Artificial Intelligence (AI) has the potential
to reshape the global balance of power.66 AI is the science and engi-
neering of machines that use complex “algorithms, modeled after the
decision-making processes of the human brain, that can ‘learn’ from
available data and make increasingly more accurate classifications
and predictions over time.” * 67 In recent years, AI has been used to
solve complex problems, provide predictive analytics, recognize and
interpret visual information, engage in natural language processing
to create high-quality content and “understand” and analyze written
and verbal language, and speed the development of robotics.68 The
country that leads in AI has the potential to reap economic bene-
fits including productivity enhancement and the ability to innovate
new products and services and enable insights for business leaders
through data analysis.69 The full extent to which AI will transform
and underpin various industries is still unfolding, but its estimated
impact is massive. McKinsey & Company estimates that AI could
add up to $4.4 trillion annually to the global economy.70 As dis-
cussed below, AI also has numerous military applications that may
provide a strategic advantage to the United States or China in an
Indo-Pacific conflict.71
The United States and China Vie for AI Supremacy
  China recognizes the transformational potential of AI and is
positioning itself to capitalize on technological breakthroughs.
Chinese commentators point to the defeat of the top Chinese
player in the boardgame Go by Google’s AlphaGo in May 2017 as
a “Sputnik moment” for the country, which kicked off an effort to
channel attention and resources from entrepreneurs, tech talent,
and policymakers.72 Two months later, the State Council issued
an AI strategy titled the “New Generation Artificial Intelligence
Development Plan,” which called for increased funding and sup-
port to make China a leader in AI theory, technology, applica-
tion, and innovation by 2030.73 Then, in late 2022, the powerful
demonstration of OpenAI’s generative model ChatGPT-3 again
surprised China’s AI industry, exemplifying a clear advantage
for the United States.74 At the annual meeting of China’s rub-
ber-stamp legislature, Premier Li announced an “AI+” initiative
in his work report intended to “actively develop the digital in-
dustry, transform traditional industries with digital technologies,
and fully integrate digital technology into the real economy.” 75
Beijing is making noteworthy investments in its AI capabilities,
utilizing government funding mechanisms and leveraging the
non-state sector for its economic development and efforts to “leap-
frog” the United States militarily.76
  * There are numerous subtypes of AI that serve various uses. One of the major types of AI is
machine learning, in which a computer algorithm is developed to analyze and make predictions
from data that are provided in a system. Deep learning, a form of machine learning, uses com-
plex layers of computation to form a deep neural network, which is capable of learning from
large amounts of unstructured data. IBM, “Understanding the Different Types of Artificial Intelli-
gence,” October 12, 2023; National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, Artificial
Intelligence (AI).
                                             181

  The race for superior AI across industries relies on successfully
bringing together enabling technologies and building blocks, includ-
ing advanced chips; computational power, including cloud services;
well-designed algorithmic models; and vast and rich data to train
models. Currently, the United States has a lead in most of these
technologies and building blocks.
Semiconductors Underpin U.S.-China AI Competition
   Semiconductors are integral to U.S.-China competition in AI. Ad-
vanced semiconductors are key to AI capabilities due to their role
in accelerating processing speeds and harnessing the computation-
al power needed for complicated AI-related computing tasks.77 The
United States currently has a lead in advanced semiconductors.78
According to an August 2024 report by the Information Technol-
ogy and Innovation Foundation, Chinese competitors are around
“five years behind global leaders in high-volume manufacturing of
leading-edge logic semiconductor chips” and trail in memory chips
and semiconductor manufacturing equipment.79 U.S. companies like
NVIDIA and AMD dominate the design of advanced chips, and they
are fabricated almost exclusively by Taiwan Semiconductor Manu-
facturing Company (TSMC).80 The United States has sought to pro-
tect that lead through export controls and domestic investments.81
The U.S. government and its partners and allies have introduced
targeted export controls that have undercut China’s ability to access
high-end chips and to fabricate them domestically.82 At the same
time, the United States has made substantial investments in grow-
ing domestic production capacity through the CHIPS and Science
Act.83
   China has been investing heavily in its domestic semiconductor
industry to boost its AI capabilities and overcome its dependence
on global supply chains, but it still faces numerous hurdles to over-
taking the United States. The export controls by the United States
and its allies against China, coupled with China’s desire to boost
its AI capacities, have spurred China’s domestic chip industry to
develop more rapidly, leading to significant additional spending and
experimentation.84 In March 2024, the Economist Intelligence Unit
estimated that since 2014, China’s state-led investment into its
semiconductor industry exceeded $150 billion, including central and
provincial government support.85 That estimate came prior to the
May 2024 announcement that the third phase of the Chinese gov-
ernment-supported Integrated Circuit Industry Investment Fund
(often called “the Big Fund”) had raised $47.5 billion of investment
to support China’s semiconductor industry.86 If this is all new mon-
ey, it would bring the total since 2014 to $197.5 billion. At the local
level, there are numerous provinces and municipalities that have
issued subsidies for local semiconductor-related firms or to support
the buildout of the local semiconductor industry.* 87 Specific to AI-fo-
cused chips, Beijing’s municipal government has also provided new
subsidies for firms that purchase domestically produced AI chips.88
In April 2024, the Beijing Municipal Bureau of Economy and Infor-
  * Other instances where subsidies at the local level have been provided include Beijing, Shang-
hai, Suzhou, Nanjing, Shenzhen, Qingdao, Hefei, Tianjin, Changsha, Wuhan, Chengdu, Wuxi, Hu-
nan Province, Jiangsu Province, and Guangdong Province. See endnote 87 for sourcing.
                                                182

mation Technology announced that it would give companies a per-
centage of their investment for purchases of domestically controlled
graphic processing unit (GPU) chips used in intelligent computing
services, with the city seeking to become fully self-reliant in smart
computing infrastructure hardware and software by 2027 under the
initiative.89
  China has made some strides in closing the gap on cutting-edge
GPU semiconductors used to train AI models. Wang Tao, Huawei’s
chief operating officer of its Ascend and Kunpeng ecosystem, claims
that Huawei’s Ascend 910B AI chip is capable of up to 80 percent
of the performance of NVIDIA’s A100 GPU when training large lan-
guage models (LLMs), and in “some other tests” surpasses the A100
by 20 percent.90 Analysts and sources quoted by Reuters claim that
the 910B chips are comparable to NVIDIA’s in terms of raw comput-
ing power but lag in performance.* 91 According to a detailed analy-
sis by CSET, “the performance increase is smaller than advertised;
only 75 percent of the theoretical maximum performance increase
can be attributed to an actual increase in hardware performance”
and “Huawei reduced the number of active AI cores between the
910 and 910B series—likely either due to poor yields or limited ca-
pacity on SMIC’s 7nm fabrication process.” 92 In August 2024, the
Wall Street Journal reported that Huawei is close to introducing a
new chip for AI use, the Ascend 910C, which the company claims is
comparable to NVIDIA’s H100.93 However, it has faced production
delays with these chips, and further U.S. restrictions may prevent
access to machine components and memory chips for its AI hard-
ware.94 Additionally, some experts have argued that the underlying
technology being used to produce Huawei’s chips has significantly
lower “yield,” meaning that a significant portion of the chips pro-
duced are flawed and do not function effectively, resulting in appre-
ciably higher total costs to manufacture at scale.95

     It’s Not Just Chips: How Huawei Seeks to Compete
                      across the AI “Stack”
   To date, U.S. concerns around AI and China have focused large-
 ly on access to advanced semiconductors. Similar to many other
 advanced technologies, however, AI is powered by a “stack” of en-
 abling hardware, software, and services. Policymakers have paid
 much less attention to other elements of the AI stack.
   NVIDIA is a leader in the AI space not only because of GPUs
 but also its CUDA software.† Known as its “secret sauce” or
 “moat,” CUDA is NVIDIA’s closed-source “AI software ecosystem”
 that allows programmers to utilize the parallel computing power

   * According to a report by AI Now Institute, a New York-based policy institute, computational pow-
er, also known as compute, is measured in floating point operations, or FLOP, which is a mathemat-
ical operation that enables the representation of extremely large numbers with greater precision.
Compute performance, on the other hand, is measured in floating point operations per second, or
FLOP/s. This is essentially the number of computations a given resource can carry out in a second. Jai
Vipra and Sarah Myers West, “Computational Power and AI,” AI Now Institute, September 27, 2023.
   † CUDA stands for Compute Unified Device Architecture. Related to CUDA is cuDNN (CUDA
deep neural network), a library built on top of CUDA containing tools and routines specific to
deep neural networks such as AI. 1kg, “cuDNN: What Is cuDNN?” Medium, May 4, 2024; Rakesh
Rajpurohit, “Understanding CUDA for GPU Computing,” Medium, August 15, 2023; Deep Lizard,
“CUDA Explained - Why Deep Learning Uses GPUs,” September 9, 2018; Fred Oh, “What is
Cuda?” NVIDIA, September 10, 2012; NVIDIA, “NVIDIA cuDNN.”
                                              183

     It’s Not Just Chips: How Huawei Seeks to Compete
               across the AI “Stack”—Continued
 of NVIDIA’s GPUs for building AI applications.* 96 As NVIDIA
 has been developing CUDA since 2004, it has a lead over both do-
 mestic and foreign AI chip design firms in the resources it can of-
 fer AI programmers.† 97 The symbiosis within NVIDIA’s AI stack
 has led to a “flywheel effect” that makes the company essential
 for many AI developers. As companies purchase more NVIDIA
 GPUs for AI development, more developers use CUDA; as more
 developers use CUDA, they increase their dependency on NVID-
 IA’s GPUs.98
       Figure 1: A Comparison of NVIDIA and Huawei’s AI Tech Stacks
                HUAWEI                 AI TECH STACK                    NVIDIA


             Zidong Taichu, Pangu         AI Models and          ChatGPT, Tesla FSD
                                           Applications




          Mindspore (open-source)         AI Frameworks          PyTorch (open-source)




                                            Chip/GPU
                           CANN            Enablement            CUDA
                                            Software



              9XX Ascend AI chips           Hardware             A100, H100 GPUs




   Note: The diagram indicates the various software technologies (mid-to-upper layers) that
 are either directly controlled or best optimized for NVIDIA or Huawei’s chip-based hardware
 (bottom layer), respectively. CANN and CUDA are Huawei and NVIDIA’s respective propri-
 etary software frameworks required to manage the parallel processing power of their chips.
 MindSpore (Huawei) and PyTorch (PyTorch Foundation) are open source AI frameworks that
 rely on or are best optimized for CANN and CUDA, respectively. Finally, Pangu (Huawei) and
 ChatGPT (OpenAI) are examples of technologies built or iterated using these AI frameworks.
   Source: Various.99



  * CUDA allows for the optimization, speeding up, and programming of NVIDIA GPU’s CUDA core
and machine learning-focused Tensor core sub-processing units necessary for parallel computing and
the deep learning associated with building AI models. For more, see 1kg, “cuDNN: Common Chal-
lenges and Their Practical Solutions,” Medium, June 26, 2024; Jeremy Appleyard and Scott Yokim,
“Programming Tensor Cores in CUDA 9,” NVIDIA Developer, October 17, 2017; Ravi Rao, “Tensor
Cores vs CUDA Cores: The Powerhouses of GPU Computing from NVIDIA,” Wevolver, July 25, 2024.
  † PyTorch and TensorFlow are the most popular AI frameworks for building AI models (though
PyTorch is more widely used). This is evolving slightly as Google (which designed and oversees
TensorFlow) continues building out its Tensor Processing Unit (TPU) hardware/software AI stack.
For now, CUDA is widely seen as the de facto choice for AI frameworks. As the cofounder of Py-
Torch Soumith Chintala put it in 2023, “The CUDA monopoly is nowhere close to being broken
and CUDA will continue to be the key dependency for PyTorch.” For more, see Soumith Chintala,
X.com, Jan 17, 2023. For more on PyTorch popularity compared to TensorFlow, see Valantis K,
“Battle of the Giants: TensorFlow vs PyTorch 2023,” Medium, January 28, 2023. For possible fu-
ture domestic challenges to NVIDIA and CUDA, see Dylan Patel, “How Nvidia’s CUDA Monopoly
in Machine Learning Is Breaking - OpenAI Triton and PyTorch 2.0,” SemiAnalysis, January 16,
2023; Kevin Jackson and Doug Eadline, “Spelunking the HPC and AI GPU Software Stacks,”
HPC Wire, June 21, 2024.
                                             184

      It’s Not Just Chips: How Huawei Seeks to Compete
                across the AI “Stack”—Continued
    Huawei is not just targeting advanced semiconductors but is
 also seeking to establish its own “flywheel” to displace NVID-
 IA’s dominance.100 Like NVIDIA, Huawei’s AI “tech stack” starts
 with its hardware (the Ascend family of AI chips) atop of which
 is a CUDA-like layer of software known as CANN (Compute Ar-
 chitecture for Neural Networks).101 Atop of CANN, Huawei has
 also released MindSpore, an open source AI framework of soft-
 ware similar to the popular PyTorch and TensorFlow AI frame-
 work software used to create LLMs and other AI technologies.102
 Though PyTorch and TensorFlow are also open source, Huawei
 needs an alternative because PyTorch and TensorFlow are largely
 integrated with CUDA and as a contingency should the U.S. gov-
 ernment ever block access to PyTorch and Tensorflow.* 103
    In the short term, Huawei still trails NVIDIA and its AI hard-
 ware/software “stack.” NVIDIA alone has developed 600 AI mod-
 els; and four million developers currently use CUDA software for
 training AI.104 Programmers in China also have concerns about
 Huawei’s CANN, reporting large-scale issues with bugs, software
 glitches, and general inferiority to NVIDIA’s CUDA.† 105 Mind-
 Spore also trails more popular open source AI frameworks such
 as PyTorch. While the Chinese Academy of Information and Com-
 munications Technology (CAICT) has noted that MindSpore is the
 most popular AI framework domestically within China, it admits
 that PyTorch and TensorFlow are a “duopoly” internationally.106
    However, in the long run, Huawei’s attempts to recreate NVID-
 IA’s “flywheel” via an integrated AI hardware/software stack bears
 close attention. As of July 2023, Huawei claimed that the number
 of Ascend and CANN developers had doubled from a year prior
 and reached 1.8 million.107 Huawei has also stated that nearly
 half of all large language models in China are currently trained
 on its Ascend (hardware)/CANN (software) AI ecosystem.‡ 108
    Mobile technology provides an instructive example of how
 Huawei has leveraged privileged access to China’s massive do-
 mestic market and various types of state support to overcome
 technological hurdles, accelerate adoption, and continue to pur-


  * Though there are other layers of the AI stack, the relationship between hardware (chips) and
software (CUDA/CANN) to AI frameworks (PyTorch/MindSpore) that rely on them is critical for
understanding NVIDIA and Huawei’s “flywheels”.
  † China’s own developers are still heavily reliant on CUDA, with prominent Chinese chip
startups like Moore Threads and Denglin using or accessing CUDA. Jeff Pao, “‘China’s NVIDIA’
Collapsing in a Heated Funding Dispute,” Asia Times, September 3, 2024; Che Pan, “Tech War:
NVIDIA’s Move to Curb Use of CUDA Exposes China’s Weak Link in Chip Software,” South
China Morning Post, March 6, 2024; Simon Sharwood, “China’s GPU Contender Moore Threads
Reveals Card That Can Cope with NVIDIA’s CUDA,” Register, December 20, 2023.
  ‡ Based on the most recent filings from the Cyberspace Administration of China’s Algorithmic
Registry, as of August 5, there are 487 algorithms registered within China. This includes a mix
of generative AI models, recommendation engines, and other algorithm/AI applications. Cyber-
space Administration of China, Announcement of the Cyberspace Administration of China on the
Release of the Seventh Batch of Deep Synthesis Service Algorithm Registration Information (国
家互联网信息办公室关于发布第七批深度合成服务算法备案信息的公告), August 5, 2024. Translation;
Qiheng Chen, “China’s Emerging Approach to Regulating General-Purpose Artificial Intelligence:
Balancing Innovation and Control,” Asia Society Policy Institute, February 7, 2024; Matt Sheehan,
“What China’s Algorithm Registry Reveals about AI Governance,” Carnegie Endowment for Peace,
December 8, 2022.
                                              185

     It’s Not Just Chips: How Huawei Seeks to Compete
                across the AI “Stack”—Continued
 sue technological leadership.* The United States added Huawei
 to the Entity List in May 2019, restricting access of Huawei to
 various products and technologies, including semiconductors, the
 licensed version of Android (which was the operating system [OS]
 underlying Huawei’s handsets), Android OS updates, and access
 to Google apps and services.109 Leading U.S. tech publications
 that saw Huawei as a leading manufacturer of low-cost hardware
 were concerned that the Android ban, in particular, would irrep-
 arably harm the company moving forward.110 Huawei’s domestic
 Android alternative, Harmony OS (HongMeng), was dismissed by
 Western critics as a glorified “fork” that relied on Android’s open
 source software, which would face myriad challenges in becoming
 a viable rival to Android.111
    Five years later, however, the pairing of Harmony OS with
 China’s export control-defying hardware (the Kirin 9000 chip)
 has been a key reason Huawei has continued to remain com-
 petitive in the handset space.112 Harmony OS currently is used
 on over 900 million devices globally; 2.5 million developers are
 working on apps for the Harmony OS platform, and Huawei
 targets one million apps for the OS in the near future.113 The
 company’s next mobile operating system, HarmonyOS NEXT,
 scheduled to debut October 2024, will remove its Android open
 source code, making it a fully independent mobile operating
 system.114

  China has made progress in expanding “legacy” or “mature
node” semiconductor production. Semiconductor Manufactur-
ing International Corporation (SMIC) has become the world’s
third-largest foundry and is prominent in “mature node,” or 28
nm and above chip production.115 These chips are less demand-
ing in wafer production and are made with older-generation deep
ultraviolet lithography equipment.116 China is rapidly expanding
production capacity for these semiconductors, which are crucial to
a wide range of commercial products. According to one estimate,
China is on pace to add more than 18 new chip fabs in 2024
alone.117 The Information Technology and Innovation Foundation
estimates that between 2022 and 2026, China will bring 26 new
fabs online, a majority of which will build legacy chips.118 Ac-
cording to Silverado Policy Accelerator, “China has the most fabs
expected to come online during 2022–26, which will result in it
having the most both 200 mm and 300 mm wafer capacity in the
world” and “as of March 2023, [China] accounted for 32 percent
[the world’s largest share] of current and planned capacity for 20
to 180 nm semiconductors (excluding memory).” 119

  * On a related point, Huawei’s continued status as the global leader in 5G technology—as of
2023 it is still the number one provider globally—suggests limits to U.S. technology controls and
related efforts to limit the spread of national security-sensitive Chinese technology. 5G has some
important differences, however, given that Huawei was already the global leader in this technolo-
gy before the imposition of U.S. controls. Daniel Chiang and Vyra Wu, “Huawei vs. Samsung: Who
Leads the Global Communication Equipment Race?” DigiTimes, April 17, 2024.
                                             186

   The Silverado production capacity estimates were made in Oc-
tober 2023; since then, China’s imports of semiconductor manu-
facturing equipment surged to new highs for calendar year 2023
and are on pace to surpass that in 2024. In 2023, China was the
largest global importer of semiconductor manufacturing equipment,
importing $42.5 billion, almost $15 billion more than Taiwan, the
second-largest importer.120 According to data from China’s General
Administration of Customs, Chinese imports of chip equipment in
the first seven months of 2024 hit a new high, totaling $26 bil-
lion.121 Lithography tools, in particular, are a key piece of semicon-
ductor manufacturing equipment for which China currently has no
significant domestic alternative, with only an estimated 1 to 1.2 per-
cent of lithography tools manufactured domestically.122 In the past
five years, China has imported 444 lithography machines from EU
trading partners (predominantly the Netherlands) and $27.4 billion
dollars’ worth of semiconductor manufacturing equipment in 2023,
an increase of nearly 50 percent from the prior year.* 123
   Given limitations on advanced semiconductor manufacturing
equipment sales, China is constantly pursuing legal and illegal
means to acquire semiconductor manufacturing equipment.124 On
its own, China is not likely to catch up at scale on high-end AI
chips, at least not using current technology.125 SMIC and Yangtze
Memory Technologies Corp (YMTC) are still dependent on Western
equipment, especially for making more high-end semiconductors.126
Unless China can solve the “yield” problem inherent in using older
equipment to produce more advanced semiconductors, it is not likely
to be able to produce AI-caliber chips in quantities needed for the
massive expansion in AI demand that is projected.127 It is worth
noting, though, that total AI infrastructure demands for national
security uses are likely a fraction of those needed for the broader
commercial market.

       Legacy Semiconductors Underpin Wide Variety of
   Modern Technologies; Significant Risk of Overcapacity
                         Glut from China
   Although the world’s most cutting-edge semiconductors are at
 the forefront of advancements in AI, “legacy” semiconductors are
 critical for a whole host of other technologies.† Legacy chips are
 pervasive and essential, as they can be found in nearly every elec-
 tronic device ranging from automobiles, fighter jets, drones, med-
 ical devices, smartphones, computers, industrial equipment, sci-
 entific equipment, communications devices, sensors, and more.128

  * The complexity of these machines cannot be overstated. The latest extreme ultraviolet lithog-
raphy machines produced by ASML are “the size of a bus, but so accurate they could direct a laser
to hit a golf ball as far away as the Moon.” Lucy Rodgers et al., “Inside the Miracle of Modern
Chip Manufacturing,” Financial Times, February 28, 2024,
  † Chips are categorized based on their function. Analog chips are used to capture real-world
wave signals such as those used in sound amplification, energy regulation, some sensors, and
surveillance equipment. The most sophisticated category is logic chips, which process data and
conduct computing functions, with applications in smartphones, AI and advanced computing, and
the automotive industry. Logic chips are differentiated further based on performance, which is
related to the distance between circuits, or nodes. Generally, chips below the 10-nanometer node
threshold are considered advanced, with smaller nodes allowing for more transistors to be packed
onto a chip to increase computational speed and power. Lin Jones et al., “U.S. Exposure to the
Taiwanese Semiconductor Industry,” U.S. International Trade Commission, November 2023, 5.
                                187

    Legacy Semiconductors Underpin Wide Variety of
  Modern Technologies; Significant Risk of Overcapacity
             Glut from China—Continued
 In some cases, mature node chips are used alongside leading-edge
 processors to power these technologies; in others, only “legacy”
 chips are needed.129
    Currently, the legacy semiconductor supply chain is fairly di-
 versified, but China already plays an important role in it. China
 accounted for 31 percent of global legacy chip production at the
 end of 2023, and in a few years it is projected to become the
 leading global producer of 200 mm to 300 mm semiconductors.130
 According to a May 2024 report by Rhodium Group, China not
 only has more capacity than any other country in analog, discrete,
 mixed-signal, and power chips, it is also expanding production
 capacity in those chips faster and at a larger scale than any other
 country.131
    Legacy chips have also been an important source of techno-
 logical power bolstering Russia’s war against Ukraine. According
 to a June 2024 New York Times report, an expansive network of
 illicit exporters operating in China and several other countries
 has managed to ship an estimated $4 billion worth of restricted
 integrated circuits to Russia since its invasion of Ukraine. Many
 of these come from Chinese companies shipping via shell com-
 panies in Hong Kong, helping “China emerg[e] as the dominant
 chip supplier to Russia.” 132 Despite not being suitable for ad-
 vanced military technologies such as AI, legacy semiconductors
 have been found in a host of Russian weapons and are a critical
 dual-use technology for Russia’s war efforts. (For more informa-
 tion on China’s sales of integrated circuits to Russia, see Chapter
 1, “U.S.-China Economic and Trade Relations (Year in Review).”)
    If past is prologue, once China’s massive new semiconductor
 fabrication capacity comes online, China may flood the world with
 cheap legacy semiconductors, forcing prices down.133 In turn, this
 could threaten the viability of other countries’ legacy semicon-
 ductor industries and provide China significant global econom-
 ic leverage.134 According to Jimmy Goodrich, nonresident fellow
 at the University of California’s Institute on Global Conflict and
 Cooperation, “Already, Chinese foundries are engaged in a price
 war with their domestic competitors that has spilled over to im-
 pact similar firms in Taiwan and South Korea.” 135 This scenario
 echoes the first “China shock” and highlights rising concerns that
 China’s economic model is premised on investing in excess capac-
 ity and relying on global markets to absorb the exports.136

China Seeks to Close the Gap with the United States in Total
    Compute Power
   The rise in demand for AI has come with a corresponding need
for greater compute power, as training models require a substan-
tial amount of data and compute-intensive resources provided by
                                              188

advanced semiconductors.* 137 In this context, compute power, com-
puting power, or “compute” generally refers to national-level or
company-level infrastructure, capabilities, and resources dedicated
to computational power and data processing.138 These may include
the development and use of computing systems, data centers, cloud
computing facilities, and networks that support high-end computa-
tional tasks.139 The United States currently has a lead in compute
power over China. Experts assess that one of the factors contribut-
ing to the status of U.S.-based companies—including OpenAI, Goo-
gle, and Meta—as some of the dominant players in the global AI
landscape is their preferential access to compute.140 In particular,
these three companies are building compute infrastructure using
tens or even hundreds of thousands of advanced NVIDIA GPUs,
including the cutting-edge GH100.141 According to Paul Triolo, the
senior vice president for China and technology policy lead at Al-
bright Stonebridge Group, and Kendra Schaefer, a partner at Triv-
ium China and nonresident fellow at the National Bureau of Asian
Research, “Amassing so many advanced GPUs is largely out of reach
for Chinese technology platforms and start-ups,” and in contrast to
their U.S. counterparts, many Chinese AI players struggle to find
access to investment and compute.142 The U.S. export controls on
advanced semiconductors will help the United States maintain its
compute power lead because such semiconductors allow for new sys-
tems with significantly faster and larger total compute loads nec-
essary for the demands of AI. As such, U.S. export controls have
complicated China’s long-term capacity to keep up with the United
States in compute.143
   Chinese government efforts to expand national computing pow-
er networks and optimize resource efficiency are key to China’s AI
self-reliance drive, and Beijing has taken multiple policy actions in
recent years to improve its computing capabilities. In 2021, China’s
National Development and Reform Commission announced plans
to optimize and integrate computing resources across the country
through the (still under construction) National Integrated Comput-
ing Power Network.† 144 Chinese government departments set a tar-
get in October 2023 to increase the country’s aggregate computing
power from 197 EFLOPs (a measure of computing speed equal to
1 quintillion floating-point operations per second) to 300 EFLOPs
between 2023 and 2025, constituting a 50 percent increase.145 MIIT
claimed in October 2023 that China’s compute power ranked second
behind the United States, but it did not provide a number for its
estimate of U.S. computing power.146 In May 2024, China launched
a three-year action plan to strengthen standards in cutting-edge
   * Technologies like high bandwidth memory also allow for faster transfers of data within chips.
China has also acknowledged that it lacks a fully indigenous high-bandwidth memory supply
chain. Aside from two U.S.-sanctioned companies, China does not have any large-scale high-band-
width memory producers. Boston Consulting Group, “The Race for Advanced AI Chips,” April 17,
2024; Brocade, “The War for AI National Power: GPUs Are the Obvious Thread, but HBM Is the
Hidden Thread” (AI国力战争:GPU是明线，HBM是暗线), CSET Emerging Technology Observatory,
March 28, 2024. Translation.
   † The National Integrated Computing Power Network is an integrated and optimized network
of computing resources, such as data centers, that aims to boost China’s overall computing power
and broaden access to computing power nationwide for a variety of applications. For more, see
“The EDWC and China’s Data Center Buildout” textbox below. Global Times, “China Vows to
Establish Integrated Computing Power Network, Boosting Digital Economy: NDB Chief,” March
25, 2024.
                                              189

technologies, including national computing power, which will in part
focus on enhancing computing power infrastructure standards and
strengthening basic standards for data resources.147
   A critical aspect of compute is cloud computing. The United States
leads on cloud computing, but China has made it a priority to catch
up. Cloud computing allows computing power to be made available
to a wider range of users remotely.* It is a “crucial behind-the-scenes
engine of the digital economy . . . allowing companies to run artificial
intelligence programs.” 148 It is also a major driver of economic ac-
tivity and technological innovation in both the United States and
China. Domestically, the United States is the world’s largest cloud
market, with its public cloud market expected to exceed $430 billion
in 2024.† 149 U.S. companies currently lead the global cloud comput-
ing market, with Amazon (32 percent), Microsoft (23 percent), and
Google (12 percent) on their own making up a 67 percent global
market share.150
   Within China, Alibaba, Huawei, and Tencent control 72 percent
of China’s protected domestic cloud market.‡ 151 China’s cloud mar-
ket is the world’s second-largest market, with the Chinese govern-
ment-backed think tank CAICT calculating China’s 2023 domestic
cloud market size at $85 billion and predicting it will reach $293
billion by 2027.152 Currently, both Microsoft and Amazon AWS op-
erate cloud services in China, with Microsoft offering services un-
der a wholly owned subsidiary of local company 21Vianet and AWS
China partnering with local companies Sinnet and NWCD to offer
data center services.153 An Amazon executive for Greater China re-
portedly stated in June 2024 that AWS “is committed to long-term
investments in China, and will focus on offering generative artificial
intelligence technology and helping Chinese enterprises in their dig-
ital transformation.” 154
   In terms of international presence, China’s cloud providers cur-
rently trail U.S. firms by a significant margin. China’s big three cloud
companies only make up roughly 8 percent of global cloud market
share, led by Alibaba (4 percent global market share), Tencent (2
percent), and Huawei (2 percent).155 Chinese companies are seeking
to make significant inroads, however, in expanding cloud presence
in developing and lower-income countries. Though Chinese compa-
nies do not publish their total data center figures, China’s three
largest cloud providers have listed their international (non-China)
“availability zones”: clusters of data centers offering cloud service.
Between Huawei (33), Alibaba (28), and Tencent (22), China’s cloud
leaders operate 81 data center cluster “availability zones” outside of
China.156 Southeast Asia is currently where Alibaba (10) and Ten-
cent (8) have the most availability zones, with Huawei’s leading con-

  * The National Institute of Standards and Technology defines cloud computing as “a model for
enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable com-
puting resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly
provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction.” Peter
Mell and Tim Grance, “SP 800-145: The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing,” U.S. Department
of Commerce National Institute of Standards and Technology, September 2011.
  † The term “public cloud” is an industry term generally defined as “computing services offered
by third-party providers over the public Internet, making them available to anyone who wants to
use or purchase them.” Microsoft Azure, “What Is a Public Cloud?”.
  ‡ Alibaba controls 37 percent, Huawei controls 19 percent, and Tencent controls 16 percent of
China’s total domestic cloud market. Canalys, “Mainland China’s Cloud Service Spend Grew by
20% in Q1 2024—Canalys,” June 27, 2024.
                                              190

centration of availability zones in Mexico and South America (12),
followed closely by Southeast Asia (10).* 157 With Southeast Asia’s
cloud computing market predicted to hit $40.3 billion by 2025, U.S.
and Chinese cloud firms are positioning to battle over market share
throughout the region.158 As Bridge Song, the VP of Alibaba Cloud
Intelligence International, publicly stated September 2024, “The pri-
mary strategic market of Alibaba Cloud has always been Southeast
Asia.” 159 China tech analyst Kevin Xu pointed out in July 2023 that
in this “battle,” the data center buildout of Chinese companies at
that time far outpaced U.S. cloud providers, with Amazon having
data centers only in Indonesia and Malaysia; Google only offering
data centers in Singapore and Indonesia; and Microsoft offering
cloud services only in Singapore, with plans to build data centers in
Indonesia and Malaysia.160
   Data storage will be increasingly important as both the United States
and China are set to produce more and more data. By 2025, China is
predicted to generate more data than the United States, producing 48.6
zettabytes to an estimated 30.6 zettabytes for the United States.161
Managing and storing this amount of data for both the United States
and China will require an enormous amount of physical infrastructure
and energy. China is seeking to address these challenges by simulta-
neously building out data storage and optimizing electrical infrastruc-
ture layout for data centers. (For more on this, please see the textbox
on “The Eastern Data Western Computing (EDWC) and China’s Data
Center Buildout” later in this chapter.)
   This growth coincides with a Party-state push that sees cloud as
essential to China’s national security, technological, and economic
goals. Leading government organizations such as the State Council
and MIIT have highlighted cloud adoption as a key component of
strategic “five-year plans” involving the long-term direction of tech-
nology and the economy.† 162 Cloud is also crucial to state-led goals
for increasing compute through infrastructure as a service (IaaS),
with the construction of cloud facilities and data center nodes as
the backbone of China’s massive “Eastern Data Western Computing”
(EDWC) project.163 Besides the EDWC, China’s state asset manager,
the State-Owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commis-
sion of the State Council (SASAC), has launched a “national cloud”
available for use by China’s state-owned enterprises.164 Finally, at
the provincial level, companies like Alicloud have been partnering
with key municipalities such as Hangzhou, Tianjin, and Shenzhen
in efforts to strengthen their local cloud computing infrastructure
for data exchanges that China sees as essential to its “new digital
economy.” ‡ 165
  * Until recently, Alibaba also operated cloud data centers in Australia and India (two zones
each for four zones total); however, as of 2024, these plants are planning to cease operation. Mu-
hammad Zulhusni, “Alibaba Cloud Shutters Australian and Indian Data Centres, Contradicting
Earlier Claims,” CloudTech, July 2, 2024.
  † China’s tech firms are not the only players in its cloud computing market; as of July 2024, at
least 16 local governments in China have offered companies coupons to access processing power
at subsidized prices at large state-run data centers where scarce supplies of advanced chips have
been pooled. Also, U.S. tech companies like Amazon and Microsoft continue to provide cloud ser-
vices in China. Liza Lin, “China Puts Power of State behind AI—and Risks Strangling It,” Wall
Street Journal, July 16, 2024; Reuters, “List of Chinese Entities Who Have Turned to the Cloud
for Access to Restricted US Tech,” August 23, 2024.
  ‡ China’s data exchanges are state-supervised sites for the purchase, sale, or “exchange” of data
across a wide variety of state and economic sectors. China sees them as critical for utilizing data
as a “new factor of production” and strengthening its digital economy. Qiheng Chen, “China Wants
                                             191

   Eastern Data Western Computing (EDWC) and China’s
                       Data Center Buildout
    China is reshaping a significant part of its domestic develop-
 ment program in order to create the infrastructure for the com-
 pute, data center capacity, and electrical power requirements nec-
 essary for advanced technologies such as AI. Current estimates
 indicate China’s domestic data centers consume roughly 200 ter-
 awatt hours (TWh) of electricity now, set to grow to roughly 300
 TWh by 2025 and 380 TWh by 2030.* 166 China’s Ministry of Ecol-
 ogy and Environment has estimated that the share of national
 energy consumption by data centers will rise from 1.5–1.9 percent
 circa 2020 to over 5 percent by 2030.167
    China has developed a plan to meet the growing demand for
 data center compute while potentially contributing to regional
 development needs. China’s eastern regions, where current data
 centers are concentrated, already face high electricity prices and
 strained electrical grids.† 168 These problems in Eastern China
 contrast sharply to the situation of Western China, which has
 severely underdeveloped data center infrastructure but abundant
 and cheap energy as well as land.169 (For more on China’s energy
 needs and constraints, see Chapter 7, “China’s New Measures for
 Control, Mobilization, and Resilience.”)
    To solve this imbalance of data center power needs and relative
 cost structures, China has spent the past several years imple-
 menting a grand realignment plan for its digital infrastructure:
 the Eastern Data Western Computing (EDWC) project. The EDWC
 envisions a massive buildout of data centers and cloud facilities
 in western provinces with abundant (green, low-carbon) energy
 resources, such as Inner Mongolia, Ningxia, and Guizhou.‡ 170
 Since being formally codified as national-level policy in 2021, the
 National Development Reform Commission issued a joint order
 along with numerous other government entities to accelerate the
 EDWC implementation and buildout.171
    The EDWC also is intended to advance China’s long-term goal
 of increasing the availability of computing power through a “na-
 tionally integrated computing power network,” or NICPN, that is

to Put Data to Work as an Economic Resource—But How?” Digichina, February 9, 2022; Julia Lu,
“China’s Data Exchanges, Explained,” Technode, August 17, 2021.
  * A terrawatt hour is the amount of power generated by a 1-terawatt generator (or multiple
lower-power generators equivalent to a 1-terawatt generator) for one hour. To put these terms on
a human scale, 1 gigawatt is enough to power approximately 750,000 U.S. homes for one year.
1,000 Gigawatts = 1 Terrawatt. Zach Stein, “What Is a Terawatt Hour (TWh)?,” Carbon Collective,
October 1, 2024; Caleb Harding and Lily Ottinger, “Powering China’s Data Centers: Batteries or
Nukes?” ChinaTalk, September 12, 2024.
  † Power consumption is a major concern for data center operators, with some academics placing
power consumption at 70 percent of a data center’s operational expenses. For a general sense of
China’s power consumption and generation at a national level, a useful comparison comes from
Reuter’s market analyst John Kemp: “Ten provincial-level areas in the east and south (Liaoning,
Hebei, Beijing, Tianjin, Shandong, Jiangsu, Shanghai, Zhejiang, Fujian and Guangdong) account-
ed for 50% of national consumption but only 40% of generation in 2022. By contrast, six remote
and sparsely populated northern and western areas (Inner Mongolia, Xinjiang, Shanxi, Shaanxi,
Gansu and Ningxia) accounted for 18% of consumption but 25% of generation.” Ning Zhang et
al., “The ‘Eastern Data and Western Computing’ Initiative in China Contributes to Its Net-Zero
Target,” Engineering, August, 2024; John Kemp, “China’s Rapid Renewables Rollout Hits Grid
Limits,” Reuters, July 4, 2024.
  ‡ There are several translations of the project’s name with slight variants. We have chosen to
use “Eastern Data Western Computing,” as it is one of the most widely reported translations.
                                             192

    Eastern Data Western Computing (EDWC) and China’s
               Data Center Buildout—Continued
 currently under construction.172 The NICPN seeks to pool and
 allocate compute from the EDWC’s interconnected data centers
 as well as existing data centers in order to boost China’s overall
 computing power and increase the effectiveness of how it is allo-
 cated.173 Newly appointed head of the National Data Administra-
 tion (NDA) Liu Liehong cites the NICPN as crucial for meeting
 the computing power needs of advanced technologies like gener-
 ative AI.174
    As of June 2024, Liu Liehong announced that China’s govern-
 ment had invested roughly $6.2 billion in the project, with ad-
 ditional funding of more than $28.4 billion from other sources,
 including the private sector.175 Early analysis reveals the data
 centers’ “primary operators” will be China’s big three state-owned
 telecoms, with China Mobile investing $6.4 billion, China Telecom
 investing $4.9 billion, and China Unicom investing $3 billion.176
 China tech champions Huawei and Alibaba have also made major
 investments in the project, with estimated financing of $4.7 bil-
 lion and $3 billion, respectively.177
    While the EDWC program faces some challenges over demand,
 cost, and latency, China’s government believes the EDWC and
 NICPN can boost China’s capacity in data center technology, com-
 puting power, and the digital economy, particularly as energy de-
 mands from data centers for AI increase.178 The United States is
 now making efforts to ensure that it maintains a strategic lead
 in compute by meeting with leading AI, AI GPU, and data center
 companies to discuss how the United States can rapidly build
 out its data center infrastructure and provide energy resources
 to meet the needs of these technologies.179

  Access to compute via cloud computing complicates and inter-
nationalizes U.S.-China AI-related competition. Cloud computing
can be an effective way to circumvent export controls on advanced
chips, as it allows remote access to the computing power enabled
by such chips.* Since the chips themselves are not exported in a
cloud computing service, export controls are not necessarily impli-
cated at all.180 For example, Chinese companies targeted by U.S.
sanctions have found workarounds to obtain access to restricted
U.S. AI technology by using third-party cloud providers and rental
arrangements.181 iFlytek, a state-backed voice recognition compa-
ny blacklisted by Washington in 2019, has been renting access to
NVIDIA’s A100 chips.182 According to an investigative report by Re-
uters in August 2024, Chinese state-linked entities were accessing

  * Remote access to compute power is also a potential issue for quantum computing. According to
Edward Parker with RAND Corporation, “Many quantum computing companies do not sell hard-
ware but instead operate under a cloud-access model whereby customers submit tasks remotely
and the companies perform the actual computations in-house. Any export controls on quantum
computing should clearly address the permissibility of selling computing services to foreign cus-
tomers, even if no physical hardware ever leaves the United States.” Edward Parker, written
response to question for the record for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission,
Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Economic and National Security
Competition, February 1, 2024.
                                               193

controlled NVIDIA chips for AI training via AWS and other cloud
providers.183 Also in August 2024, the Wall Street Journal reported
on a company in Australia which, with the help of investors from
Dubai and the United States, set up a cloud service powered by
NVIDIA’s advanced H100 chips at least in part to process AI algo-
rithms for Chinese-based companies.184 An executive at the compa-
ny explained the decision to target China: “There is demand. There
is profit. Naturally someone will provide the supply.” 185
   The United States has begun to explore how to combat China’s
use of cloud computing for access to AI technologies, but solutions
to date all have significant limitations. First, to prevent Chinese
companies from simply setting up AI infrastructure outside of China
and using it there (or making it available in China), existing ex-
port controls on advanced semiconductors apply to Chinese entities
even when they are operating overseas.186 Second, so-called “U.S.
persons” authority would prevent U.S. cloud providers from know-
ingly providing services that contribute to certain specified national
security risks, including helping Chinese entities obtain access to
advanced semiconductor technology.* 187 Third, on an ad hoc basis,
the U.S. government appears to be using various points of leverage
to persuade domestic technology providers and their potential for-
eign partners that want access to the most advanced semiconductor
technology to take measures to exclude Chinese entities.188 Fourth,
the United States has proposed “know your customer” rules and re-
porting requirements for domestic cloud providers when their ser-
vices are used by foreign entities to train large AI models.189 Each
of these rules or proposals, however, has some limitations in scope,
coverage, and/or comprehensiveness—for example, applying only to
Chinese companies, only to U.S. companies, or only on an ad hoc
basis.† There is currently no comprehensive authority akin to export
controls for broadly restricting access to cloud services reliant on
U.S. technology.

   * Originally, the “U.S persons” authority only applied to limit activities of U.S. persons that
contribute to proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. ECRA expanded the coverage to in-
clude support for “foreign military intelligence services.” Congress significantly expanded this
authority again in 2022 to allow BIS to prohibit U.S. persons from knowingly providing support
to adversarial foreign military services, intelligence services, and security services. In July 2024,
BIS proposed a rule to implement the new authority that would significantly expand the scope
of “U.S. persons” restrictions to cover a broad class of “foreign security end users.” According to
Gibson, Dunn, & Crutcher LLP, a multinational law firm, the breadth of the restrictions will likely
necessitate the enhancement of company diligence efforts to better understand end users, with
cloud service providers potentially needing to ensure that U.S. persons are not providing prohib-
ited services or support for restricted parties. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry
and Security, “Export Administration Regulations: Crime Controls and Expansion/Update of U.S.
Persons Controls,” Federal Register 89:145 (July 29, 2024); Restrictions on Specific Activities of
“U.S. Persons,” 15 C.F.R. § 744.6, 2024; National Defense Authorization Act for 2023, Pub. L. No.
117-263, 2023; 50 U.S.C. § 4812(a)(2)(F); Gibson, Dunn, and Crutcher LLP, “Proposed Rules Call
for Significant Restrictions on Facial Recognition Technologies, Defense Services, U.S. Persons
Activities, and New Classes of Foreign End-Users,” August 13, 2024; Export Control Reform Act
(ECRA) §1741(2), Pub. L. No. 115-232, August 13, 2018, codified as amended at 50 U.S.C. §4801(2).
   † The United States has used sanctions as a tool to limit certain types of technology-related
transactions with an adversary, including the provision of certain cloud services. Specifically, in
response to Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s
Office of Foreign Assets Control prohibited “U.S. persons” located anywhere in the world from
exportation, reexportation, sale, or supply, directly or indirectly, of quantum computing services
to any person located in Russia. This action prohibits U.S. cloud services companies from sup-
porting Russia’s quantum computing sector. Stefan H. Reisinger and Mikkaela Salamatin, “New
US Sanctions and Export Restrictions on Russia and Belarus,” Norton Rose Fulbright, September
2022; U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Foreign Assets Control, Determination Pursuant
to Section 1(a)(ii) of Executive Order 14071: Prohibitions Related to Certain Quantum Computing
Services, September 15, 2022.
                                              194

     CCP Control and Xi Jinping Thought May Constrain
                         China’s AI Models
    China risks inhibiting its AI ambitions by its tight regulations
 on LLMs. Heavily censored datasets can lead to biases in AI
 models and limit their ability to handle certain tasks.190 In April
 2023, the Cyberspace Administration of China (CAC) unveiled its
 draft measures on generative AI services.191 The CAC will require
 companies to go through a government security review process
 and make companies responsible for the content their AI services
 generate, such as prohibiting content the CCP views as politically
 sensitive, including arbitrary and broad definitions of subverting
 state power, inciting secession, or disrupting social order.192 Addi-
 tionally, the CAC requires companies to test whether the models
 can provide “safe” answers to users by preparing between 20,000
 and 70,000 questions.193 Companies must also submit a dataset
 of 5,000 to 10,000 questions the model will decline to answer,
 roughly half of which relate to political ideology and criticism of
 the Communist Party.194 Xu Chenggang, a senior research schol-
 ar at the Stanford Center on China’s Economy and Institutions,
 has asserted that China’s strict censorship rules could inhibit the
 quality of data and the development of chatbots, stating that “if
 there are restrictions everywhere in the setup of your algorithms,
 of course its ability will be restricted.” 195
    China is also developing a closed-source LLM based on Xi Jin-
 ping’s political philosophy in a move that demonstrates the CCP’s
 desire to experiment with centralized control over AI as a strate-
 gic asset. The machine learning language model was launched by
 the China Cyberspace Research Institute, which operates under
 the CAC.196 Answers are sourced from a fixed pool of Chinese
 official documents and outlets.197 The model is still undergoing
 internal testing and was not yet available for public use, but it is
 open to “designated users by invitation,” according to the CAC.198

China Seeks to Create Advanced Generative AI Models to Outcompete
     the United States
  The third element of AI competition is the quality of generative
AI models. Generative AI models can transmit algorithms into text,
images, audio, video, and code, enabling the creation of new con-
tent.199 Although assessing AI models “is an art, not a science . . .
making it difficult to compare Chinese models with global leaders,”
most experts believe the United States currently leads China in this
space.200 China’s demonstrations of its generative AI models in early
2023 failed to outperform U.S. models like ChatGPT.201 Baidu’s ER-
NIE Bot launch, which relied on prerecorded examples rather than
a live demonstration, was largely seen as a flop.202 Erniebot and
Alibaba’s Tongyi Qianwen also both performed worse than ChatGPT
in writing computer code.* 203 More than a dozen tech industry in-
   * For example, Robin Li, Baidu’s chief executive, admitted halfway through a “live” demonstra-
tion of Ernie that it was prerecorded. In June 2023, however, Baidu claimed that its Ernie 3.5
model outperformed OpenAI’s ChatGPT and GPT-4 across numerous metrics, such as answering
over 13,000 multiple-choice questions across 50 different subjects in Chinese more correctly. How-
ever, when the model took a separate test that was developed by a group of U.S. universities, the
                                             195

siders and leading engineers interviewed by the New York Times in
February 2024 said the generative AI capabilities of Chinese compa-
nies still lag behind those of U.S. companies by at least a year, with
the article claiming that Chinese companies rely almost entirely on
underlying systems from the United States.204 In April 2024, Aliba-
ba chairman Joe Tsai said that Chinese firms lag behind U.S. peers
in AI development by at least two years.205
  Chinese companies are making a concerted effort to develop gen-
erative AI models similar in sophistication to those of U.S. compa-
nies.206 China’s AI development landscape is diverse, with approxi-
mately 50 Chinese companies developing AI models as of June 2024,
compared to the relatively small number of large companies in the
United States that focus on developing models such as OpenAI, Goo-
gle, and others.207 As of late September 2023, China accounted for
40 percent of all LLMs in the world (while the United States has 50
percent), according to brokerage and investment group CLSA.208 By
June 2024, analysts asserted that by some metrics, Baidu’s ERNIE
Bot and Zhipu AI’s GLM-4 had reached a similar level of quality as
Open AI’s GPT-4 model. Due to the evolution of leading-edge mod-
els and soon-to-be-released models like GPT-5, these analysts assert
that benchmarking remains a moving target, which may also pose
challenges for Chinese AI firms in developing metrics to assess their
own capabilities.209 Baidu’s CEO Robin Li said in July 2024 that
there are “too many” LLMs in China, which he says have resulted
in a “significant waste of resources, particularly computing power”;
he also questioned how many of these have provided real-world ap-
plications that are beneficial.210

  The Open vs. Closed Debate and U.S.-China Competition
   As the United States and China compete for technological lead-
 ership in AI, there have been concerns raised as to whether open
 source AI models may be providing Chinese companies access to
 advanced AI capabilities that would not otherwise be available,
 allowing them to catch up to the United States more quickly.
   The debate surrounding the use of open source models and
 closed source models is a vigorous one within the industry, even
 apart from issues around China’s access to the technology. Advo-
 cates of the open source approach argue that it promotes fast-

Ernie 3.5 model performed behind ChatGPT and GPT-4. Yasheng Huang, a professor of manage-
ment at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, said of China’s efforts to build ChatGPT-level
chatbots that “China is incredibly good at scaling an existing invention, but it is not very good
at making breakthroughs.” The Ernie bot has still become a popular option for generative AI
use, as Baidu claimed in April 2024 that its platform has over 200 million users. Additionally,
the Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence’s WuDao 2.0, released in the summer of 2021, was
touted by Forbes as a “bigger, stronger, faster AI” due to having ten times more parameters (the
numbers inside an AI model that determine how it processes information) than GPT-3. However,
AI experts Helen Toner, Jenny Xiao, and Jeffrey Ding assert that having more parameters “does
not make one AI system better than another” if it is not matched with corresponding increases in
data and computing power, and they also argue that the Chinese researchers who posed questions
to the model helped boost its performance to appear stronger. Tracy Qu, “Baidu Says Ernie AI
Chatbot Now Has 200 Million Users,” Wall Street Journal, April 16, 2024; Arjun Kharpal, “Chi-
na’s Baidu Claims Its Ernie Bot Beats ChatGPT on Key Tests as A.I. Race Heats Up,” CNBC,
June 27, 2023; Helen Toner, Jenny Xiao, and Jeffrey Ding, “The Illusion of China’s AI Prowess,”
Foreign Affairs, June 2, 2023; Cheyenne Dong, “Alibaba Rolls Out ChatGPT Alternative Tongyi
Qianwen,” Technode, April 10, 2023; Chang Che and John Liu, “China’s Answer to ChatGPT Gets
an Artificial Debut and Disappoints,” New York Times, March 16, 2023; Alex Zhavoronkov, “Wu
Dao 2.0 - Bigger, Stronger, Faster AI from China,” Forbes, July 19, 2021.
                                196

  The Open vs. Closed Debate and U.S.-China Competition—
                             Continued
 er innovation by allowing a wider range of users to customize
 it, build upon it, and integrate it with third-party software and
 hardware.211 Open model advocates further argue that such mod-
 els reduce market concentration; increase transparency to help
 evaluate bias, data quality, and security risks; and create more
 benefits for society by expanding access to the technology.212 Ad-
 vocates of the closed source approach argue that such models are
 better able to protect safety and prevent abuse, to ensure faster
 development cycles, and to help enterprises maintain an edge in
 commercializing their innovations.213
    From the standpoint of U.S.-China technology competition, how-
 ever, there is one key distinction: open models allow China and
 Chinese AI companies access to key U.S. AI technology and make
 it easier for Chinese companies to build on top of U.S. technology.
 In July 2024, OpenAI, a closed model, cut off China’s access to
 its services.214 This move would not have been possible with an
 open model; open models, by their nature, remain open to Chi-
 nese entities to use, explore, learn from, and build upon.215 And,
 indeed, early gains in China’s AI models have been built on the
 foundations of U.S. technology—as the New York Times report-
 ed in February 2024, “Even as [China] races to build generative
 A.I., Chinese companies are relying almost entirely on underlying
 [open model] systems from the United States.” 216 In July 2024,
 at the World Artificial Intelligence Conference in Shanghai, Chi-
 nese entities unveiled AI models they claimed rivaled leading U.S.
 models.217 At the event, “a dozen technologists and researchers at
 Chinese tech companies said open-source technologies were a key
 reason that China’s A.I. development has advanced so quickly.
 They saw open-source A.I. as an opportunity for the country to
 take a lead.” 218

China Leverages Data for AI and Technological Supremacy
  The U.S.-China competition in AI technology is dependent on who
can procure and compile large-scale, high-quality datasets and cre-
ate economic incentives and frameworks for sharing data. Access to
proprietary data in different sectors can be an increasingly import-
ant source of competitive advantage because better results can be
acquired by more relevant, real-world data that can be used to train
the AI models, which has a net impact on the cycle and speed of in-
novation.219 With the rising importance of data to governments, cor-
porations, and next-generation technologies like generative AI and
large models, data are quickly becoming the “new oil” that power AI
and the global economy.220
The Importance of Data to China’s Policymakers
  Since Xi’s 2012 appointment as China’s President, Party leaders
have swiftly identified data as a critical component for developing
China’s economic and technological capacity.221 This was formalized
as policy in the 2016 State Council National 13th Five-Year Plan
                                              197

for the Development of Strategic Emerging Industries, which called
for the construction of a “digital China” based upon the integration
and leveraging of data, data technology, data standards, and data
connectivity throughout China’s economic and technological infra-
structure.222 The importance of data was further highlighted by Xi
in subsequent Party speeches and study sessions, where he empha-
sized to policymakers that China must “build a digital economy with
data as a key enabler” and “promote the deepened integration of In-
ternet, big data, and artificial intelligence with the real economy.” 223
Building off these policies and presidential directives, in 2020, Chi-
na’s State Council named data “factor[s] of production,” codifying
data—along with land, labor, capital, and technology—as crucial to
China’s economic development and requiring Party supervision to
ensure economic development and avoid market distortions.* 224
Efforts to Turn Data into a Factor of Production
   Alongside Xi’s directives and official policies mandating the im-
portance of data, in March 2023, China established a new govern-
ment administration: the National Data Administration (NDA).† 225
Since its formation, the NDA has been given economic portfolio re-
sponsibilities that were previously held by domestic and national
security-minded government organs, chiefly the Cyberspace Admin-
istration of China.226 So far, the economic mandate of the NDA has
been to establish the economic value of data assets, increase data
circulation throughout China, and develop data market ecosystems
for key industrial fields such as smart manufacturing.227 The NDA’s
newly appointed leader, Liu Liehong, has also made it a point of em-
phasis to meet with China’s leading tech companies, such as iFlytek
and Didi, to discuss how best to share, monetize, and ensure data
property rights on the vast amounts of data they hold.228
   China’s data exchanges will be critical to the NDA’s efforts to turn
data into a factor of production. Broadly speaking, data exchanges
are centralized markets for buying and selling data, data products,
and data services.229 China’s first data exchange was set up in Gui-
yang in 2015; since that time, 48 data exchanges are now active in
the country.230 While in the United States these take the form of
private third-party data brokers who aggregate public or private
data for sale, China’s data exchanges are state-managed by local
governments, with the goal of building a cohesive national “data
economy.” ‡ 231 Alongside data exchanges, China has also experi-
mented with using its 21 free trade zones to facilitate companies
that wish to export “cross-border data.” 232 While still in the early
stages, the development of China’s data exchanges and free trade
zones is part of a larger goal of constructing a “big data industry,”
  * The term “factors of production” is generally seen as a key economic resource to be managed
by the Party in order to avoid market distortions. Rebecca Arcesati, “China Activates Data in the
National Interest,” Mercator Institute for China Studies, July 4, 2022; Lillian Li, “Abridged: Data
as a Factor of Production,” Chinese Characteristics: Substack, November 4, 2021.
  † The NDA sits under China’s macroeconomic planner, the National Development and Reform
Commission. Rebecca Arcesati and Jeroen Groenewegen-lau, “China’s Data Management: Putting
the Party-State in Charge,” Mercator Institute for China Studies, 2023.
  ‡ The United States and China have different models for data exchanges. Amba Kak and Samm
Sacks, “Shifting Narratives and Emergent Trends in Data-Governance Policy,” Paul Tsai China
Center, AI Now, New America, August 2021; Julia Lu, “China’s Data Exchanges, Explained,” Tech-
node, August 17, 2021.
                                             198

promoting international digital trade, and developing China’s digital
economy.233
China’s Authoritarian Practices May Provide an Edge in Certain
     Types of Data
   China’s efforts to create a national data economy has significant
implications for both its leading technology firms and the develop-
ment of AI itself. Experts have debated the general advantages that
the United States and China have regarding data and how these
advantages may affect their AI capabilities. According to Matt Shee-
han, a fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace,
in terms of quantity, China’s advantage mainly lies in the fact that
its leading tech companies have many more windows into a user’s
online and offline behaviors.234 China also holds an advantage in
terms of compiling data from public spaces, gathered from the coun-
try’s vast public surveillance network, which has given China’s fa-
cial recognition AI firms some advantages.235 Prominent scholars
have also raised concerns that China’s “AI-Surveillance symbiosis”
could lead to a “feedback loop” with data derived from surveillance
leading to iterative improvements in AI innovation.236 Furthermore,
China’s broad government collection of data could be used to en-
hance the datasets of Chinese firms across a variety of other import-
ant domains, including healthcare, education, and basic science.237
The prevalence of Chinese companies in genomics, agricultural, and
certain health-related biotechnology supply chains could provide a
significant data advantage in generative AI models geared toward
those technologies. (For more information on recent developments in
China allowing local government entities to treat data as a financial
asset, please see Chapter 1, “U.S.-China Economic and Trade Rela-
tions (Year in Review).”)
   U.S. companies and bureaucracies have a lead regarding the quali-
ty of data.238 China has not invested as much in enterprise software
or digitizing data, although this may change over time as Beijing
is incentivizing localities to digitize records and adopt AI-powered
analytical tools.239 Regarding diversity of data, the United States
holds a clear advantage because of its diverse domestic population
and the global user base of many Silicon Valley companies.240
Other Aspects of AI Competition: Workforce and Research Output
   China is attempting to advance its AI workforce in order to
compete with the United States. China has developed AI talent
partly because it invested heavily in AI education.* 241 China has
created over 2,000 undergraduate-level AI programs at more than
300 of the country’s most elite universities since 2018.242 Data
regarding global AI talent published by the think tank Macro-
Polo revealed that in 2022, 57 percent of “elite” AI researchers
(i.e., the top 2 percent) worked in the United States as opposed
to 12 percent in China, compared to 65 percent and less than 3
  * CSET reported in February 2023 that collectively, at least $40.2 billion in announced invest-
ments into 251 Chinese AI companies involved U.S. investors, though it was not clear what exact
portion of the $40.2 billion came from U.S. investors (e.g., an announcement may list multiple
investors and a headline number, without breaking down the contribution of each). Emily S.
Weinstein and Ngor Luong, “U.S. Outbound Investment into Chinese AI Companies,” Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, February 2023.
                                 199

percent in 2019, respectively.243 For “top-tier” talent (i.e., the top
20 percent), 42 percent worked in the United States in 2022 and
28 percent in China, compared to 59 percent and 11 percent in
2019.244 According to a November 2023 report by CSET, 78 per-
cent of China’s AI-related job postings are geographically concen-
trated in three economically and technologically developed hubs
with large population centers, including the Yangtze River Delta
region, the Pearl River Delta, and the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei area,
while other provinces with relatively high demand for AI talent
include Hubei, Shandong, and Hunan.245
   Regarding AI research, the comparison between the United States
and China depends on the metric chosen. China leads the United
States based on sheer volume of research published—with 575,258
articles to the United States’ 359,415 articles.246 The Commission’s
2023 Annual Report to Congress examined at length, however, why
publication volume is a flawed metric at best for measuring the
progress of Chinese academia in advanced technologies like AI.247
Plagiarism, error, and fraud have long plagued Chinese higher ed-
ucation, with China having the largest retraction rate globally of
submitted research papers, exceeding 20 per 10,000 papers submit-
ted.248 The number of citations and number of international research
collaborations may be better indicators of a country’s progress in AI
research. In these areas, the United States is still the global leader
as of September 2024, with U.S. AI papers receiving 13,296,404 cita-
tions compared to China’s 8,830,282 citations.249 The United States
also leads in global AI research collaboration with 132,672 articles
published with international collaborators, though China is not far
behind with 114,333 such articles.250 A recent study also points to a
large “diffusion deficit” between the United States and China in AI,
with China struggling to adopt AI innovations at scale in academia
and industry.251

    China Engages on AI Safety Talks but Shuns Military
                              AI Policy
    Beijing has taken limited steps to engage with the United
 States on the issue of global AI risks and safety. In November
 2023, Beijing attended the UK AI Safety Summit and agreed to
 share a common approach to identifying and mitigating AI risks
 with the EU, the United States, and 26 other countries.252 The
 same month, President Joe Biden and General Secretary Xi met
 and agreed to hold talks regarding the risks of advanced AI sys-
 tems and efforts to improve AI safety.253 In March 2024, Beijing
 supported a U.S.-led, nonbinding UN resolution on the protection
 of data and monitoring of AI risks.254 Chinese and U.S. officials
 also met behind closed doors in Geneva in May 2024 to discuss
 how each side views AI risks and safety.255
    Despite its surface-level engagement in AI safety talks, China
 has shown little willingness to make firm commitments on lim-
 iting the military applications of AI. In December 2021, China
 submitted a position paper to the UN calling on all countries to
 refrain from using AI to “seek absolute military advantage” or
 “pursue hegemony,” but it did not rule out its use for “legitimate
                                            200

    China Engages on AI Safety Talks but Shuns Military
                      AI Policy—Continued
 national defense capabilities.” 256 This caveat regarding the use
 of AI for “legitimate national defense capabilities” could suggest
 Beijing envisions using AI-enabled weapons and processes in
 military operations to defend what it regards as its “core inter-
 ests,” including the forcible unification of Taiwan.257 China did
 not support a U.S.-led declaration on the responsible military use
 of AI during November 2023.258 Chinese officials did not publicly
 respond to a statement made by Principal Deputy Assistant Sec-
 retary of State Paul Dean in May 2024 that the United States
 welcomed a clear and strong commitment from both China and
 Russia to ensure that only humans, not AI, would control nuclear
 weapons.259

China Pursues AI for Military Applications
   AI will serve as a core part of China’s future military strategy,
underpinning the PLA’s efforts to exploit vulnerabilities in the tech-
nology systems the United States deploys on the battlefield and to
make operational decisions more quickly than U.S. warfighters.260
(For more on the PLA’s approach to informationized warfare, see
Chapter 8, “China’s Evolving Counter-Intervention Capabilities and
the Role of Indo-Pacific Allies.”) Procurement records and writings
by Chinese military experts in recent years suggest the People’s
Liberation Army (PLA) is already procuring AI systems for inte-
gration into its weapons platforms and capabilities.261 One report
by CSET comparing U.S. and Chinese military procurement of AI
systems found that both militaries are focusing on similar applica-
tions, with most contracts being awarded for autonomous vehicles
and intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR).262 Of the
almost 2,000 military contracts awarded by the PLA between April
and November 2020, 119 contracts appeared to be directly related
to AI, the majority of which were related to AI-enabled autonomous
vehicles (38 percent), followed by ISR systems (17 percent), predic-
tive maintenance and logistics systems (16 percent), information
and electronic warfare (7 percent), simulation and training (4 per-
cent), automatic target recognition (4 percent), and command and
control (4 percent).* 263 This analysis reflects only a dated snapshot
of unclassified procurement and precedes the significant increase
in awareness around AI since the public release of ChatGPT—so it
should be treated accordingly.264 In any event, it is clear China is
actively pursuing AI for military applications to enhance its capabil-
ities, complement its current approach to informationized warfare,
and facilitate the PLA’s longstanding efforts to leapfrog the United
States militarily and shift the global balance of power.265




  * CSET categorized the remaining 10 percent of contracts as “other.” Margarita Konaev et al.,
“U.S. and Chinese Military AI Purchases: An Assessment of Military Procurement Data between
April and November 2020,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, August 2023, 8.
                                             201

AI as the Eyes and Ears of the PLA
   AI-enabled ISR systems appear to be a priority for the PLA.266
The PLA sees value in leveraging AI capabilities for ISR to help
speed up the processing of imagery, signals, and other kinds of intel-
ligence across the land, air, sea, and space domains.267 PLA experts
have recognized that ISR improved by AI can be useful in detect-
ing the movements of an adversary’s conventional military assets
as well as tracking its submarine and land-based nuclear forces.268
China’s incorporation of effective AI into its ISR capabilities could
allow the PLA to rapidly locate U.S. military forces during a conflict
over Taiwan or the South China Sea and help it combine joint forces
across domains to launch precision strikes.269
   According to the CSET report, most of the PLA’s known contracts
for AI-enabled ISR are awarded by the PLA Navy, and many focus
on geospatial imagery tasks such as equipping satellites with image
collection, polarized surface detection, and multi-source data fusion
tools powered by machine learning.270 A December 2023 article in
Chinese state media provided one example of a platform that may
integrate AI into ISR, noting that the Aviation Industry Corporation
of China planned to incorporate AI into the Wing Loong unmanned
aerial vehicle platform to improve the drone’s ability to perform
tasks like topographic mapping, among other things.271 Other PLA
contracts appear to focus on incorporating AI into air defense. For
example, the Hebei Xintu Technology Company was awarded a con-
tract by the PLA for a “drone aircraft detector” to be used in air
defense.272
AI in Battlefield Decision-Making
  Beijing is researching how AI can be utilized in decision-making
to enhance wargaming and command and control. At least based on
the relatively small percentage of procurements reflected in CSET’s
data snapshot, the PLA does not appear to be prioritizing these uses
as much as other applications.* 273 Chinese experts note that AI
can shorten the “observe-orient-decide-act” † loop, raise situational
awareness, and assist PLA commanders in formulating judgments,
planning missions, and controlling operations within increasingly
complex warfare environments.274 These include:
  • Reluctance to cede political control over military decision-mak-
    ing: The Central Military Commission exercises the Party’s
    political control over all military affairs and has historically
    maintained a tight grip on the use of the PLA’s strategic as-
  * As noted, this was a limited study, based on a 2020 subset of 119 PLA contracts for AI
systems. The study found that only 4 percent of these contracts were related to battlefield deci-
sion-making systems and that China awarded just five contracts for command and control appli-
cation systems between April and November 2020. It is not clear if the short “snapshot” reflects
overall PLA priorities and spending patterns. Margarita Konaev et al., “U.S. and Chinese Military
AI Purchases: An Assessment of Military Procurement Data between April and November 2020,”
Center for Security and Emerging Technology, August 2023, 14; Ryan Fedasiuk, Jennifer Melot,
and Ben Murphy, “Harnessed Lightning: How the Chinese Military Is Adopting Artificial Intelli-
gence,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, October 2021, 24–26.
  † The observe-orient-decide-act (OODA) loop is a decision-making concept developed by U.S.
Air Force Colonel John Boyd. The concept is designed to provide a disciplined means of thinking
about events that are unfolding before military decision-makers. The concept is intended to help
the military gain a decisive advantage in the decision-making process by dealing with situations
in a more expedited fashion. Kimberly Wright, “OODA Loop Makes Its Mark on Maxwell,” Air
University Public Affairs, August 25, 2010.
                                 202

   sets, such as nuclear weapons and cyber capabilities.275 While
   advances in AI will give Chinese leaders new technologies to as-
   sist decision-making, Chinese officials may be reticent to defer
   to AI-generated recommendations for military decision-making.
   Yang Zi, a PhD candidate at the S. Rajaratnam School of In-
   ternational Studies, argues that Xi’s personal preferences are
   still likely to overshadow AI-generated recommendations and
   that such a dynamic could handicap the PLA’s AI-enabled deci-
   sion-making in a crisis scenario.276 Tong Zhao, a senior fellow
   in the nuclear policy program at Carnegie China, has observed
   that China’s policy community also supports keeping humans
   “in the loop” and limiting the use of AI in nuclear weapon sys-
   tems for safety reasons.277
 • Concerns that limited data training and visibility into AI al-
   gorithms could distort military decision-making: One challenge
   for the PLA going forward will be training AI algorithms to ac-
   count for complex battlefield scenarios, in part because the PLA
   lacks data from real wars.278 Without adequate data based on
   actual combat scenarios gained while fighting an adversary, AI
   models could potentially provide false assessments or erroneous
   recommendations to military officials.279 In order to maximize
   performance, the PLA will also need to train its AI algorithms
   to analyze variables in realistic natural environments, such as
   the weather or atmospheric conditions, and in artificial envi-
   ronments, like defensive networks or battle lines.280 The PLA
   likely recognizes the problems associated with this data deficit,
   but it is unclear what steps it is taking to rectify it. For exam-
   ple, it is not clear if China and Russia are using Russia’s war
   of aggression in Ukraine as a data source.
 • Concerns that AI-enabled decision-making could exacerbate
   risks in conflict with the United States: Experts from both the
   United States and China have recognized that the integration
   of AI into military decision-making systems could accelerate a
   crisis by facilitating hasty decision-making.281 Furthermore, ex-
   perts from both countries have assessed that the adversary may
   deliberately “poison” the data used by the other side, which may
   degrade the performance and judgments of their AI systems.282
   These concerns may make Chinese leaders more reticent to rely
   on AI to make high-stakes military judgments.
AI to Enhance Combat Performance and Lethality
  The PLA is exploring the use of AI to enable autonomous sys-
tems for battlefield support and to increase the lethality of military
units by carrying out warfighting tasks traditionally conducted by
humans.283 China is researching and developing AI technologies
that seek to enhance the target recognition and coordination of
lethal autonomous weapons, which are weapons systems that use
sensor suites and computer algorithms to identify targets and sub-
sequently engage and destroy the target without manual human
control.284 Lethal autonomous weapons systems are not yet in wide-
spread development, but they could someday enable military oper-
ations in communications-degraded or -denied environments where
traditional systems may not be able to operate.285 Platforms that
                                             203

are classified as lethal autonomous weapons systems include mis-
sile defense systems, sentry systems, and loitering munitions.286 AI
systems performing automatic target recognition made up only 4
percent of PLA contracts in the limited CSET snapshot of public
contracts examined, but there are early signs that Chinese defense
manufacturers are designing systems that could someday actualize
the lethal autonomous weapons concept.* 287 For example, one Chi-
nese manufacturer of intelligent unmanned aerial systems known
as Zhuhai Ziyan UAS has produced the Blowfish A2, an unmanned
helicopter equipped with guns, bombs, radar technology, and jam-
ming devices.288 The Blowfish A2 reportedly uses an AI module to
automatically identify multiple targets such as ships, vehicles, and
personnel to assist PLA combat units in carrying out attacks and
reconnaissance missions.289
AI in Disinformation and Cognitive Warfare Operations
   A major area of U.S.-China competition within AI is large lan-
guage models, or LLMs,† which China could deploy against the
United States in cognitive warfare operations.‡ 290 China has en-
gaged in online influence operations against the United States for
years and appeared to escalate large-scale online influence opera-
tions on U.S.-based social media platforms since 2019, when Meta
and X (formerly known as Twitter) first attributed inauthentic ac-
counts originating from China.§ 291 Nathan Beauchamp-Mustafaga,
a senior policy researcher at the RAND Corporation, testified before
the Commission that AI could significantly enhance China’s existing
cyber-enabled influence operations.292 Mr. Beauchamp-Mustafaga
argued that generative AI could dramatically improve the authen-
ticity, cost effectiveness, and scale of state-sponsored influence oper-


   * An automatic target recognition system is not necessarily a lethal autonomous weapon sys-
tem, as human intervention could still be a necessary step in the decision to use lethal force
against the recognized target.
   † LLMs are mathematical representations of patterns found in natural language that can cre-
ate text, answer questions, and hold conversations by making inferences about subsequent words
in sentences. LLMs power generative AI tools such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT and Google’s Bard.
Generative AI refers to algorithms that can be used to create new content, including audio, im-
ages, text, simulations, and videos. McKinsey and Company, “What Is Generative AI?” McKinsey
and Company, April 2, 2024; Katrina Manson, “The US Military Is Taking Generative AI Out for
a Spin,” Bloomberg, July 5, 2023; William Marcellino et al., “The Rise of Generative AI and the
Coming Era of Social Media Manipulation 3.0: Next-Generation Chinese Astroturfing and Coping
with Ubiquitous AI,” RAND Corporation, 2023, 5–6.
   ‡ Cognitive warfare consists of influencing international public opinion, shocking and demor-
alizing enemy soldiers and citizens through psychological operations, and conducting influence
campaigns to shape international law in Beijing’s favor. LLMs and text-to-image models are
also well suited to social media manipulation due to their ability to produce convincing text and
images—with little effort by the user—that can then be disseminated online. William Marcel-
lino et al., “The Rise of Generative AI and the Coming Era of Social Media Manipulation 3.0:
Next-Generation Chinese Astroturfing and Coping with Ubiquitous AI,” RAND Corporation, 2023,
7; Koichiro Takagi, “The Future of China’s Cognitive Warfare: Lessons from the War in Ukraine,”
War on the Rocks, July 22, 2022.
   § For example, in March 2020, China-linked accounts disseminated false warnings about a
nationwide COVID-19 lockdown to allegedly incite public panic within the United States and
decrease trust with the U.S. government. A September 2023 report by the U.S. Department of
State’s Global Engagement Center noted that aside from narratives on COVID-19, China has also
carried out disinformation campaigns about the AUKUS partnership as well as echoing Russia’s
false accusations that the United States is escalating the war in Ukraine. U.S. Department of
State, How the People’s Republic of China Seeks to Reshape the Global Information Environment,
September 28, 2023, 26, 38; Edward Wong, Matthew Rosenberg, and Julian E. Barnes, “Chinese
Agents Helped Spread Messages That Sowed Virus Panic in U.S., Officials Say,” New York Times,
January 5, 2021; Sarah Cook, “Welcome to the New Era of Chinese Government Disinformation,”
Diplomat, May 11, 2020.
                                              204

ations by malign actors while reducing human labor requirements
and the probability of detection.293
   Similarly, reporting by Microsoft has established that an actor af-
filiated with China’s domestic security services has used AI to spread
disinformation in democracies such as the United States and Tai-
wan.294 In April 2024, Microsoft reported that the CCP-linked actor
Storm-1376 (also known as “Dragonbridge” or “Spamouflage”) has
used AI-generated content to conduct influence operations spanning
175 websites and 58 languages.295 Storm-1376 was reportedly re-
sponsible for spreading conspiratorial narratives on multiple social
media platforms, alleging that the U.S. government had deliberately
initiated the wildfires on the northwest coast of Maui, Hawaii.296
Storm-1376 also targeted Taiwan’s 2024 presidential and legisla-
tive elections, attempting to undermine the legitimacy of multiple
candidates, including now president William Lai, in what Microsoft
claimed was the first time AI had been used to influence a foreign
election.* 297 (For more information on China’s attempts to influence
Taiwan’s elections, see Chapter 9, “Taiwan.”)
   In their writings, PLA researchers have shown interest in using
generative AI for future cognitive warfare operations.298 In 2020, for
example, two PLA researchers argued in the China Military Science
journal that deepfakes using AI are cheap and easy to create and
require less time than other methods, asserting that improvements
in machine learning will lead to their prevalence.299 There is also
evidence that PLA-affiliated researchers at Base 311, a Chinese mil-
itary unit headquartered in Fuzhou Province that conducts cogni-
tive warfare, have explored how the Chinese military can use AI to
automatically generate authentic-looking content.300

    China Developing Humanoid and Quadruped Robots
   One of the areas AI is helping revolutionize is robotics. AI is
 helping accelerate the development of humanoid and quadruped
 robots, both in their ability to respond to human commands and
 in their capacity for fine and gross movement for expanded ver-
 satility.301 For instance, China’s state media has said that the
 application of LLMs can make humanoid robots more capable of
 possessing decision-making capabilities, although the connection
 between the robot’s “brain” and its “limbs” is still awaiting new
 technological breakthroughs.302 China’s MIIT announced in Octo-
 ber 2023 that the country would establish a world-class human-
 oid robot innovation system by 2025 and deploy humanoid robots
 in “real economy” industries such as manufacturing, build an in-


  * In December 2023, Storm-1376 also promoted a series of AI-generated memes of Taiwan’s then
Democratic Progressive Party candidate William Lai with a countdown theme noting “X days” to
take the Democratic Progressive Party out of power, as well as an AI-generated video of a woman
claiming to “reveal” Mr. Lai’s mistresses and illegitimate children and an AI-generated audio file
claiming Mr. Lai was an informant in the 1980s. On election day in January, Storm-1376 posted
suspected AI-generated audio clips of Foxconn owner Terry Gou, an independent candidate in
the presidential race. The audio manipulated Mr. Gou’s voice to make it sound as though he was
endorsing another candidate in the presidential race, even though he never formally endorsed
any presidential candidate in the race. During the same month, Storm-1376 also created and
amplified a defamatory video series about then President Tsai Ing-wen using AI-generated news
anchors and ByteDance’s CapCut video editing app. Microsoft Threat Intelligence, “Same Targets,
New Playbooks: East Asia Threat Actors Employ Unique Methods,” April 2024, 6–8.
                                               205

   China Developing Humanoid and Quadruped Robots—
                              Continued
 ternationally competitive industrial industry, and expand the use
 of humanoid robots throughout society by 2027.303
    The realistic timing for the wide-scale availability of fully func-
 tional humanoid and quadruped robots within China is not clear.
 Humanoid robot firms globally face technical obstacles, including
 the limited storage capacity of batteries that power the robots
 and the current technical limitations of components like actu-
 ators that allow the robot to move itself and manipulate other
 objects.304 Far more progress is needed before humanoid robots
 will be able to reason through an unexpected situation and then
 act on it.305 While China’s capacity to achieve its goals in the
 stated time frames may be doubtful, if their overall efforts are
 successful, humanoid robots could have transformative impli-
 cations across commercial industries, including manufacturing,
 agriculture, and healthcare and potentially for military and law
 enforcement as well.306
    When sufficiently advanced, these rapidly developing humanoid
 robot technologies have serious implications for China’s military
 capabilities. China’s policy of military-civil fusion, which leverages
 commercial technologies for the advancement of China’s military,
 blurs the boundaries of what would constitute a commercial or
 military product.307 Chinese military analysts have put forth new
 theories of human-robot cooperation if the technology advances,
 such as replacing front-line soldiers with humanoid robots while
 humans maintain control of command and decision-making.308
 Chinese state media outlets claim that humanoid robots will
 change the organization and use of combat forces, since they can
 theoretically be mixed with humans and grouped separately ac-
 cording to combat missions and objectives; they can also be used
 for logistical support such as carrying equipment, for heavy con-
 struction tasks, or for planting and removing mines.* 309
    One example of military applications emerged in May 2024
 during China’s Golden Dragon-2024 joint military exercise with
 Cambodia, when the PLA unveiled a modified version of a quad-
 ruped robot “dog,” the B1, made by Chinese robot maker Uni-
 tree.† 310 Equipped with a mounted assault rifle on its back,
 the quadruped can jump as well as follow and lead an infantry
 team.311 One PLA soldier told Chinese state media that the quad-
 ruped robot could engage a target upon discovery, asserting that
 the technology will serve as a “new team member for our urban

  * Former PLA officer and military commentator Fu Qianshao wrote in an online commentary in
April 2024 that humanoid robots could aid the PLA in an invasion of Taiwan by replacing actual
troops on the battlefield, which would reduce the risk of human casualties. Fu Qianshao, “The
Rise of China’s Humanoid Robot Industry Will Replace the People’s Liberation Army in Perform-
ing Tasks, Making the Reunification Easier,” (中国人形机器人产业崛起，代替解放军执行任务，让统
一大业更), Gaze into the Sky [NetEase Blog], April 15, 2024. Translation. https://web.archive.org/
web/20240430181509/https:/www.163.com/dy/article/IVQR04OO0535T18G.html.
  † According to Unitree’s company website, a commercial version of the B1, which can be used
for inspecting power plants, is equipped with AI capabilities that enable it to avoid collisions in
real time, control switches, press buttons, and carry out other tasks. Unitree, “Recognition Devices
+ AI Algorithm Bring Unitree Power Robotic Inspectors to the Posts.” https://web.archive.org/
web/20240601021926/https://shop.unitree.com/blogs/news/recognition-devices-ai-algorithm-
bring-unitree-power-robotic-inspectors-to-the-posts.
                                             206

   China Developing Humanoid and Quadruped Robots—
                             Continued
 attack and defense operations.” 312 Unitree has claimed that it
 does not sell its products to the PLA, but the use of its product
 in a formal military exercise underscores the ease with which the
 PLA can potentially acquire products from civilian companies.313
   In the future, China’s demographic decline could lead to human-
 oid robots as replacements for an aging, shrinking workforce.314
 In the present, Chinese researchers are also exploring the use of
 humanoid robots for economic and commercial purposes. Human-
 oid robots in China are undergoing limited deployment in various
 sectors but are primarily being used for research, and reports in-
 dicate humanoid robot firms are not generating commercial sales
 yet.315 However, rapidly declining costs of producing humanoid
 robots could allow for more widespread adoption.316 A Goldman
 Sachs report from February 2024 estimates that the humanoid
 robot market could reach $38 billion by 2035, with 1.4 million
 units shipped, primarily for industrial settings.317 The Goldman
 Sachs report also notes that the viability of “mass-produced, gen-
 eral-purpose humanoid robots . . . hasn’t been proven yet.” 318

Quantum Information Science: The Next Frontier of U.S.-
     China Technology Competition
   Quantum information science (QIS) * may eventually become a
paradigm-shifting technology enabling computation and sensing at
a speed and scale heretofore impossible. Quantum technology will
enable a significant performance boost in processing that will poten-
tially help solve complex problems more efficiently. Advancements
in quantum technology could potentially revolutionize global supply
chains by refining production processes, streamlining logistics, and
optimizing resource allocation.319 QIS also has significant military
and national security implications. QIS can enable a state to decrypt
an adversary’s communications, improve the ability to locate and
track an adversary’s military assets, and process battlefield data
faster than an opponent.320 Arthur Herman, a senior fellow and di-
rector of the Quantum Alliance Initiative at the Hudson Institute,
asserts that “the nation that enjoys quantum supremacy, will dom-
inate the future of the global system,” as the technology will offer
significant advantages for business and national security.321
   QIS can be grouped into three primary categories, each of which
can be used for military and civilian-commercial applications: com-
munications, sensing, and computing.322 Quantum communications
uses qubits, or photons of light that transmit data along optical ca-
bles, making communications extremely secure against eavesdrop-
ping and interception.323
  * According to the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, QIS seeks to understand how infor-
mation is processed and transmitted using quantum principles, merging quantum mechanics, and
information/computation theory. Quantum computers process information in the form of qubits,
which may occupy intermediate values rather than using bits with a 1 or 0 value (like classi-
cal computers). Qubits operate cooperatively through quantum entanglement, which multiply
interactions over billions of switches to create a powerful computer that can tackle computation-
al challenges that classical computers cannot. Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, “What Is
Quantum Information Science?”
                                             207

   Quantum sensing technologies analyze data at the atomic level,
making them significantly more sensitive and accurate compared to
conventional sensors.324 In military applications, quantum sensing
is used to help enhance imaging, radar, sub-surface sensing, and
navigation capabilities (including in GPS-denied environments).325
   Lastly, where a classical computer can solve a problem with mul-
tiple variables along a single path, quantum computers can explore
multiple paths in parallel to scale their operations exponentially.326
Quantum computing could enable countries to break through en-
cryption methods used by adversarial governments and militaries,
improve military logistics, enhance modeling and simulation, and
rapidly increase the pace of scientific research.327
   Experts differ on the likely timeframe over which the potential of
QIS can be realized, and it varies across the three categories. While
the field of quantum mechanics has been studied for over a century,
applications in advanced technologies have entered or approached
practical development only in recent years.* 328 Some experts assert
that we are on the cusp of a new revolution in quantum technolo-
gy, as experimental concepts are being actualized into technological
breakthroughs.329 The U.S. Defense Science Board has estimated
that quantum sensing technology, which is generally considered by
experts to be the closest to useful deployment, will have “operational
utility” in the 2024 to 2029 timeframe.330 In a response to a ques-
tion for the record before the Commission, Edward Parker, physical
scientist with the RAND Corporation, agreed with this assessment,
stating that broadly speaking, quantum sensing is the most tech-
nically mature of the three subfields of QIS.331 Dr. Parker noted
that within quantum computing, technical approaches based on
superconducting, trapped-ion, or neutral-atom qubits are more ad-
vanced than quantum computers based on photonic, silicon-spin, or
topological qubits.332 Furthermore, Dr. Parker stated that the high-
est-impact applications of quantum computing, such as decryption,
are unlikely to arrive prior to 2030.333 Boston Consulting Group
reports that between 2025 and 2030, new quantum communications
technologies will be adopted by private companies, and a growing
number of quantum random number generator chips will become
more prevalent in Internet of Things (IoT) infrastructure, while new
quantum communications repeaters, memories, and error-correction
algorithms will be adopted from 2030 onward.334
   Because of its potential importance, both the United States and
China are investing heavily into QIS and are the two leading coun-
tries by most relevant metrics.335 In October 2020, Xi himself em-
phasized the importance of quantum technology, telling the CCP’s
Central Committee that the development of quantum science and
technology “is of great scientific significance and strategic value”
and that it is a “major disruptive technological innovation.” 336 More
recently, in August 2024, the United States said that QIS “holds the
potential to drive innovations across the American economy, from
  * Dr. Parker asserts that broadly speaking, the field of quantum technology “is still very na-
scent,” with atomic clocks being the only quantum technology publicly known to be deployed by
any nation’s military. Edward Parker, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Economic and
National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 4.
                                             208

fields as diverse as materials science and pharmaceuticals to finance
and energy.” 337
   The United States and China are competing heavily to outpace
each other in QIS research.338 China’s quantum R&D is largely
carried out in Hefei, Anhui Province, at state-funded laborato-
ries, with additional support from several startups.339 The He-
fei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale
(HFNL), affiliated with the University of Science and Technology
of China, received $1.06 billion in laboratory funding in 2017, ac-
cording to Chinese media reporting, with an additional (although
not confirmed) funding package of $2.95 billion per year planned
between 2017 and 2022.340 Assuming this funding was provid-
ed as described, the figure for this single laboratory far exceeds
the estimated annual R&D spending on quantum research for
the entire country, listed in the 13th Five-Year Plan (2016–2020)
at approximately $84 million, illustrating its importance as the
center for China’s development of quantum technologies.341 In
addition to this state laboratory, Hefei is also home to three of the
eight major quantum startups in China, including Ciqtek, Origin
Quantum, and QuantumCtek.* 342 Outside of Hefei, other major
quantum startups include Kunfeng, Qasky, QuDoor, Shenzhou
Quantum Communication Technology, and SpinQ.343 Although
other large Chinese technology companies—including Alibaba,
Baidu, Huawei, Tencent, and ZTE—had invested in quantum
technology R&D, Dr. Parker notes they appear to have reduced
their investment in the field, with both Baidu and Alibaba closing
their quantum research labs since November 2023.† 344
   The U.S. government is a primary funder of open QIS research
domestically, growing significantly every year since the 2018 Na-
tional Quantum Initiative.‡ 345 The National Quantum Initiative
Act authorized eight initiatives in QIS for sustained multiyear
   * Dr. Parker et al. assert that the largest difference between Chinese startups and their U.S.
counterparts is that the Chinese companies have announced far less capital funding, with only
$44 million in publicly identified capital for Chinese quantum startups compared to $1.28 billion
for U.S. startups. Edward Parker et al., “An Assessment of the U.S. and Chinese Industrial Bases
in Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, February 2, 2022, 84.
   † According to Dr. Parker, several of the large Chinese companies, such as Baidu and Ten-
cent, had shut down their quantum computing efforts. He noted that Baidu announced it was
selling all of its quantum computing hardware to a national lab, assessing that the concentra-
tion to national labs appeared to be consolidating even more in the six months prior to Febru-
ary 2024. Although Dr. Parker said he did not have great visibility into why Baidu made this
decision, he speculated that the company assessed it would not be technically competitive in
this field, as they were “far behind U.S. companies, did not seem to be catching up, and did not
see it as a revenue generator.” Dr. Parker argues that when discussing China as a whole, the
country appeared to be doubling down on national laboratories, as none of the Chinese quan-
tum technology companies seemed to be globally competitive. In Baidu’s 2023 annual report
to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, the company acknowledges the impact of
the Biden Administration’s August 2023 executive order directing the Treasury Department
to create an outbound foreign direct investment review program that will require reporting
on (or in more narrow circumstances prohibit) investments by U.S. persons involving “covered
national security technologies and products,” including quantum information technologies, as
well as the Treasury Department’s Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking. Baidu claims
that “uncertainties on whether the outbound foreign direct investment review program will
have a material impact on our business, results of operations, financial condition, and pros-
pects.” U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Form 20-F, March 15, 2024. 45–46; Edward
Parker, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on
Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competi-
tion, February 1, 2024, 167.
   ‡ The National Quantum Initiative is authorized through 2029, but certain programs within it
had specific authorized appropriations levels only through FY 2023. National Quantum Initiative
Advisory Committee, “Renewing the National Quantum Initiative: Recommendations for Sustain-
ing American Leadership in Quantum Information Science,” June 1, 2023.
                                             209

funding, such as the National Science Foundation-led Institute
for Hybrid Quantum Architectures and Networks and the Depart-
ment of Energy’s Co-design Center for Quantum Advantage.346
The U.S. government provided actual budget expenditures for
QIS R&D of $449 million in fiscal year (FY) 2019, $672 million
in FY 2020, $855 million in FY 2021, and $1.03 billion in FY
2022, followed by $932 million of enacted budget authority for
FY 2023 and a requested budget authority of $968 million for FY
2024.347 Some of these expenditures have resulted in additional
government support at the state level. For example, the U.S. De-
partment of Commerce’s Economic Development Administration
announced $41 million in funding on July 2, 2024, for Elevate
Quantum (“Elevate”), a private-public consortium seeking to ad-
vance quantum research in the Mountain West, which unlocked
$77 million in funding for Elevate from Colorado and $10 mil-
lion from New Mexico.348 The United States also has a strong
private industry in QIS with at least 182 firms, a majority of
which (139 companies) are part of Quantum Economic Develop-
ment Consortium (QED-C), established by the National Quantum
Initiative.349 As of 2021, 55 of these QED-C companies focus on
computing, 20 focus on sensing, 12 focus on communications, and
40 deal with cross-cutting sectors of QIS.350 The venture capital
(VC) industry has been a significant source of funding for quan-
tum in the United States, with sources indicating over $2.5 bil-
lion invested through 2022, though perhaps echoing the private
sector investment decline in China, 2023 saw a significant decline
of 80 percent in VC funding for quantum computing in the United
States.351
   Overall, Dr. Parker assesses that China’s progress across the
three main subdomains of QIS has made the country “impres-
sively fast followers across many quantum technology areas” and
that some experts regard China as the world leader in quantum
communications.352 A 2022 research report by Dr. Parker et al.
comparing the quantum industrial bases of China and the United
States found that the United States is the overall top producer of
high-impact * scientific publications in QIS, most notably in the
fields of quantum computing and sensing.353 By contrast, China
leads in high-impact quantum communications research.354 In
terms of institutional research capacity, as of 2020, China actu-
ally had a greater number of institutions working on quantum
research across the three primary subdomains of QIS than did
the United States, though the qualitative edge this may provide
remains unclear (see Table 1).355




  * RAND Corporation defines “high-impact” by the number of academic citations a publica-
tion receives. The authors of the report argue that “if a nation is a global leader in developing
new quantum technologies, then its research activity will strongly impact the rest of the
world’s R&D as well.” The report notes that a “widely accepted metric of research impact” is
the number of citations a publication receives. Edward Parker et al., “An Assessment of the
U.S. and Chinese Industrial Bases in Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, February 2,
2022, 19.
                                             210
Table 1: Number of U.S. and Chinese QIS Publishing Research Institutions

                                 United States                            China
                         # of        % of                      # of       % of
      Metric            Labs *      Pubs †     H-index ‡       Labs       Pubs      H-Index
 Computing              1,236        21.5         104          1,592       22.4         61

 Communications            581       12.2          39          1,288       38.6         51

 Sensing                   376       15.3          67            535       26.1         59
  Note: The covered time period for the number of labs working on quantum technology is 2011–
2020, while the percentage of publications and H-index scores cover 2019–2023.
  Source: Edward Parker et al., “An Assessment of the U.S. and Chinese Industrial Bases in
Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, February 2, 2022, 34, 74; Jamie Gaida, Jenny Wong-
Leung, and Stephan Robin, “Critical Technology Tracker,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute,
2023.

   However, these U.S. and Chinese leads in particular quantum ar-
eas may change, given the long timelines for implementation.
   Below is a brief discussion of some areas of apparent progress in
China on QIS. There may be a basis for skepticism regarding some
of the claimed breakthroughs announced by Chinese researchers;
when these have been questioned by U.S. scientists and experts, it
is noted.356
  • Potential progress in computing: Recent developments illus-
     trate China’s potential progress in quantum computing capa-
     bilities.
    ○ In September 2024, the South China Morning Post (SCMP)
       reported that Chinese scientists at Shanghai University
       had demonstrated the first effective attack using a quan-
       tum computer on the class of algorithms used in pass-
       word-protection and encryption mechanisms common in
       military and financial networks.357 The researchers used a
       quantum computer produced by Canadian company D-Wave
       Systems.358 According to the authors, this study did not
       produce a passcode for the best available military-grade
       encryption like Advanced Encryption Standard (AES-256),
       but such a breakthrough may be closer than ever before.359
       The authors of the study did note that underdeveloped
       hardware and the incapability of a single attack algorithm
       to target multiple cryptographic systems presented practi-
       cal constraints.360
    ○ Quantum experts agree that the study indicates “incremen-
       tal advances in quantum computing” but also note that the
       SCMP article was misleading, as the study itself applied only
       to RSA encryption,§ not military-grade AES (Advanced En-
   * Number of research institutions with at least one publication in each subfield from 2011 to
2020.
   † Percentage of total global published research by Chinese researchers and institutions.
   ‡ H-index (Hirsch Index) is commonly used to assess both the breadth and impact of research
and is considered the best single metric for measuring research quality of a corpus of publica-
tions.
   § The Rivest-Shamir Adleman (RSA) algorithm is a basic key encryption that is widely used
to secure sensitive data. Michael Cobb, “RSA Algorithm (Rivest-Shamir Adleman),” Tech Target.
                                              211

       cryption Standard) encryption, and did not render current
       cryptographic systems obsolete.361
     ○ In January 2023, a group of Chinese scientists claimed they
       used a combination of classical and quantum computing
       techniques to breach the RSA encryption algorithm used in
       military, banking, and communications systems.362 Notably,
       the paper summarizing their findings asserts that the RSA
       algorithm could be broken with a quantum machine using
       only 372 qubits (which is less than IBM’s world-class Osprey,
       operating with 433 qubits), potentially illustrating the effi-
       ciency of the Chinese quantum computer if the findings are
       true.363 However, quantum researchers and scientists have
       offered mixed reviews of the paper, with Massachusetts In-
       stitute of Technology (MIT) scientist Peter Shor stating, “As
       far as I can tell, the paper isn’t wrong” but that the Chinese
       researchers failed to demonstrate the speed with which the
       quantum algorithm would run, leaving questions regarding
       the degree of improvement.364 At the time of the announce-
       ment, the SCMP noted that the paper had not been officially
       peer reviewed, and Scott Aaronson, director of the Quantum
       Information Center at the University of Texas at Austin, said
       the article was “one of the most actively misleading quantum
       computing papers I’ve seen in 25 years.” 365
     ○ In June 2024, the Anhui Quantum Computing Engineering
       Research Center and QuantumCTek (the latter of which is a
       quantum company currently on the Commerce Department’s
       Entity List) * jointly announced that their quantum computer
       dilution refrigerator is the first equipment of its kind commer-
       cially available for mass production in China.† 366 According
       to an article published by the Anhui Daily, the dilution re-
       frigeration products were delivered to two scientific research
       units, and “after many months of testing by customers, the
       equipment has been operating continuously and stably for a
       long time.” 367 (For more on the importance of certain refrig-
       eration technology to QIS, see “The Global Quantum Supply
       Chain and Relevant U.S. Export Controls” below.)
     ○ Origin Quantum ‡ announced in May 2024 that it had suc-
       cessfully developed a high-density microwave interconnect
       module that domestic media has described as a “neural net-
   * QuantumCTek also appears under the aliases of HKUST National Shield Quantum Technol-
ogy Co., Ltd.; HKUST Guodun Quantum Technology Co., Ltd.; National Shield Quantum; and
Anhui Quantum Communication Technology Co., Ltd. in the Commerce Department’s Entity List.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Addition of Entities and Revision of Entries on the Entity List; and
Addition of Entity to the Military End-User (MEU) List, November 26, 2021.
   † Heat causes errors in qubits that serve as the building blocks of quantum computers, neces-
sitating the use of refrigerators that keep the temperature just above absolute zero. In Dr. Park-
er’s oral testimony before the Commission, he asserted that “a surprising amount of quantum
supply chain revolves around extremely powerful refrigerators.” Edward Parker, oral testimony
for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging
Technologies in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 165;
Adam Zewe, “A New Way for Quantum Computing Systems to Keep Their Cool,” MIT News Office,
February 21, 2023.
   ‡ Origin Quantum was established in 2017 in Hefei, Anhui Province, by Guo Guancan, an ac-
ademician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and Guo Guoping, who serves as deputy director
of the Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Quantum Information and associate dean
of the School of Microelectronics and the Institute of Advanced Technology at the University of
Science and Technology of China.
                                              212

       work” for quantum computers.* 368 A major obstacle to the
       module’s domestic production in China has been sourcing an
       ultra-low-temperature specialized high-frequency coaxial ca-
       ble, which was previously imported from Japan.369 This new
       device can allegedly provide microwave signal transmission
       channels for quantum chips with more than 100 bits and can
       achieve stable signal transmission across temperature zones
       in cool environments.370 According to Kong Weicheng, a re-
       searcher at Origin Quantum, the module will allow quantum
       chips to exert “more powerful computational capabilities,”
       which enable quantum computers to operate efficiently.371
  • Potential progress in sensing: There are signs of progress
    in China’s prototype quantum radars, which could advance the
    PLA’s capability to detect foreign military assets.372 In 2018, for
    example, the 14th Institute of the defense SOE China Electron-
    ics Technology Group Corporation announced that its quantum
    radar technology had successfully tested detecting targets up
    to 62 miles away, asserting that the technology is expected to
    solve bottleneck issues associated with traditional radars, such
    as low-visibility target detection, survival under electronic war-
    fare conditions, and other challenges.373 In 2021, a laboratory
    at Tsinghua University also tested a quantum radar that its
    researchers claimed was capable of increasing the probability of
    detecting stealth aircraft by generating a small electromagnetic
    storm.374
    ○ However, MIT professor Jeffrey Shapiro, one of the technolo-
       gy’s inventors, has previously argued that there are problems
       with this approach that make it unfeasible.375
  • Potential progress in communications: China has sought to
    create secure communications links through both ground-based
    stations and satellites.376 Dr. Parker notes that Beijing may be
    seeking to build an internal communications system without
    any Western technologies, which reflects the Chinese leader-
    ship’s anxiety about vulnerability to foreign espionage.377 Chi-
    nese scientists have primarily focused their quantum communi-
    cations R&D on a method known as quantum key distribution
    (QKD), which may improve communications security against
    enemy interception.378 In 2021, China successfully tested the
    world’s first integrated QKD network, combining a satellite link
    through the Mozi (Micius) satellite that connects two ground
    stations approximately 1,616 miles apart (which achieved QKD
    in 2016) as well as an optical fiber network stretching around
    1,243 miles from Beijing to Shanghai (completed in 2017),
    providing a total distance of roughly 2,858 miles of coverage
    across China.379 China launched its second QKD satellite in
    July 2022—known as Jinan 1—for additional experimentation
  * This breakthrough was announced shortly after BIS added Origin Quantum and 21 other
Chinese quantum organizations to its Entity List for “acquiring [and/or] attempting to acquire
U.S.-origin items in support of advancing China’s quantum technology capabilities.” It is too early
to assess the impact of BIS action on China’s continuing ability to make quantum advancements.
U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, “Additions of Entities to the Enti-
ty List,” Federal Register 89 FR 41886 (May 14, 2024); Origin Quantum, “About Origin Quantum.”
                                              213

      in low Earth orbit.380 The Mozi satellite was used to establish
      a secure communications link with Russia in March 2022.* 381
U.S. Response to Quantum National Security Risks
  Unlike the broad, country-based controls imposed by the United
States in the advanced semiconductor space, until September 2024,
the U.S. policy response to QIS national security risks had been more
limited perhaps due to the earlier stage of the technology and the
possibility that many QIS uses are not military. Until that time, the
United States had primarily taken an entity-based approach with
respect to QIS-related export controls against China.† 382 In No-
vember 2021, the Commerce Department’s Bureau of Industry and
Security (BIS) added eight Chinese entities to the Entity List, in-
cluding QuantumCTek, “to prevent U.S. emerging technologies from
being used for the PRC’s quantum computing efforts that support
military applications” and citing potential uses in counter-stealth
and anti-submarine applications as well for breaking encryption
and developing unbreakable encryption.383 In May 2024, BIS added
another 22 Chinese institutes and firms to the Entity List, including
Origin Quantum, for aiding China’s quantum development.384
  In September 2024, BIS issued a new interim final rule imposing
worldwide export controls on “quantum computers, related equip-
ment, components, materials, software, and technology that can
be used in the development and maintenance of quantum comput-
ers.” 385 BIS notes that the controls had been aligned with inter-
national partners; they are similar to those put in place this year
by the UK, France, Spain, the Netherlands, and Canada, which
some reporting suggests resulted from “Wassenaar minus 1” discus-
sions.386 The new BIS quantum controls also include provisions cre-
ating a licensing exception for countries that implement “equivalent
national controls,” thus incentivizing countries to adopt similar con-
trols to ease their access to U.S. technology and ability to engage in
cooperative research.387 Finally, the new controls include limited ex-
ceptions, so as not to disrupt ongoing R&D efforts across borders or
with foreign persons engaged in QIS research in the United States,
and annual reporting requirements to provide greater visibility into
the types of such activities.388
  * According to the South China Morning Post, China launched Mozi, or Micius, the world’s first
quantum communications satellite, in 2016. A team of Russian scientists began working with
the Mozi team in 2020 to help them set up systems to begin conducting experiments with the
satellite, according to Alexey Fedorov, one of the paper’s coauthors. Speaking on the results of
the experiment, the Russian scientists said the results help account for the imperfections of QKD
protocols, such as the problem of detector efficient mismatch, which they say are “important in
the context of their practical security.” The Russian scientists who wrote the paper are affiliated
with six different Moscow-based institutions, including the Russian Quantum Center, Moscow
Institute of Physics and Technology, QSpace Technologies, HSE University, National University
of Science and Technology MISIS, and the Steklov Mathematical Institute of the Russian Acad-
emy of Sciences. In the acknowledgements section of the paper, the Russian authors thanked
“our colleagues from the University of Science and Technology of China” for their assistance and
recommendations during the joint experiment. Victoria Bela, “China and Russia Test ‘Hack-Proof’
Quantum Communication Link for Brics Countries,” South China Morning Post, December 30,
2023; Aleksandr V. Khmelev et al., “Eurasian-Scale Experimental Satellite-Based Quantum Key
Distribution with Detector Efficiency Mismatch Analysis,” Optics Express 32:7 (March 2023): 1, 8.
  † The United States did impose a broader technology-based ban relating to quantum computing
against Russia and Belarus in September 2022. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Indus-
try and Security, “Implementation of Additional Sanctions against Russia and Belarus under
the Export Administration Regulations (EAR) and Refinements to Existing Controls,” Federal
Register 87:179 (September 16, 2022).
                                               214

The Global Quantum Supply Chain and Relevant U.S. Export
     Controls *
  The nature of the QIS supply chains have made a U.S. policy
response more challenging than the more concentrated semicon-
ductor supply chain.389 Additionally, some argue that the early
stage of the technology and the uncertainty surrounding which
QIS applications will be national security-sensitive necessitate
a nuanced approach to export controls to ensure they do not in-
terfere with the research and collaboration needed to develop
the technology.390 Dr. Parker argues that export controls should
primarily be applied to systems with operational military capa-
bilities instead of more broadly.391 Under a capability-focused ap-
proach, U.S. export controls would only target specific quantum
technology when it becomes capable of delivering qualitatively
new capabilities like decryption.392 To illustrate this approach, in
his February 2024 testimony to the Commission, Dr. Parker pro-
vided the example of “quantum sensors” as a category, where at
that point there were no general export controls on the technology
as a whole, but instead there were export controls applicable to
certain highly sensitive sensors (e.g., high-sensitivity magnetom-
eters, gravimeters, and superconducting electromagnetic sensors)
that would cover certain quantum sensors if they are successfully
developed.393 Such an approach is different than the broad-based
approach currently taken for advanced semiconductors, which
seek to deny China’s access to a key foundational technology for
AI given the inherent risks, rather than just limiting access to
specific military applications.
  A more broad-based approach to export controls for QIS could
be more complicated than the similar approach used for advanced
semiconductors and semiconductor manufacturing equipment giv-
en that the QIS supply chain is more varied. As Dr. Parker notes,
“there are currently a wide variety of technical approaches [to QIS]
being researched in parallel, which require very different critical
components.” 394 A May 2024 report by Sam Howell, an associate fel-
low at CNAS, noted that the quantum computing sector has several
different modalities under development that each require a differ-
ent and evolving set of inputs with very little overlap.395 Further,
the inputs could change as the technology matures, so the quantum
technology supply chain could remain in flux for the next several
years or even decades.396
  BIS has identified a number of quantum computing-related tech-
nologies for export controls. In September, 2022, BIS prohibited ex-
port of quantum computing-related technology to Russia and Belar-
us, including quantum computers and certain components, cryogenic
refrigeration systems and components, ultra-high vacuum (UHV)
equipment, high quantum efficiency photodetectors and sources, and
software and technology related to each the development, production,
  * Please note that the new BIS quantum controls announced in September 2024 likely overtake
some of the analysis in this subsection. Due to the timing of the release of these new controls rel-
ative to finalization of this report, their length (31 Federal Register pages), and the complexity of
both the Export Control Classification Number system and QIS-related technology supply chains,
a full analysis of the policy implications of those controls is beyond the scope of this report. U.S.
Department of Commerce, Department of Commerce Implements Controls on Quantum Comput-
ing and Other Advanced Technologies alongside International Partners, September 5, 2024, 3.
                                              215

or use of the foregoing.* 397 In its September 2024 QIS-focused con-
trols, BIS took a broader approach, imposing controls on a variety of
new Export Control Classification Number (ECCN) product catego-
ries and amending the scope of other existing ECCNs.† 398 The BIS
quantum controls cover extremely powerful cooling systems, which
are needed to reduce heat that causes errors in qubits that serve
as the building blocks of quantum computers.399 Although the Unit-
ed States produces some of its own quantum cryogenic products,
it is allied or partner countries—not China—that largely make up
the remainder of the supply chain for the refrigeration technologies
needed in quantum devices.400 A September 2022 report by Sandia
National Laboratories notes that aside from two U.S.-based man-
ufacturers of the technology, there are manufacturers in Canada,
France, Finland, the Netherlands, and the UK.401
   Other potential key “chokepoint” components have been more dif-
ficult to identify.‡ A 2022 Hyperion Research survey of 47 respon-
dents across the U.S. quantum computing supply base listed various
materials and products that respondents identified as the most like-
ly potential causes of quantum computing supply chain disruption
in the coming years: helium-3 gas, silicon-28, copper, aluminum,
gold, high-performance cryocoolers, pumps, valves, compressors,
power supplies, RF generators, superconducting wiring assemblies,
dilution fridge components, fiber and coaxial cables, low-noise lasers
at relevant atomic wavelengths, and key manufacturing equipment
useful for quantum and classical chip manufacturing and testing.402
Some of those materials and components are likely to have multiple
sources of availability outside of the United States and allied coun-
tries. The September 2024 BIS quantum controls do apply to certain
QIS-related components.403 It is beyond the scope of this chapter to
further analyze these supply chains.
Biotechnology: State-Backed Firms Build Global Imprint
  Biotechnology is an emerging field with wide-ranging commercial
and military applications and the potential to revolutionize various
key sectors of the economy.404 A deeper understanding of natural
systems, biochemistry, and genetics paired with increasingly power-
ful tools for manipulating cell structures has resulted in improved
medicines and therapeutics, increased crop yields, new biofuels and
bioenergetics, inorganic substances, and advancements in materi-
al science and manufacturing processes.405 The application of AI
   * At the same time as the noted BIS action relating to QIS and Russia, U.S. Department of the
Treasury, Office of Foreign Assets Control imposed sanctions that prohibited “U.S. persons” locat-
ed anywhere in the world from exportation, reexportation, sale, or supply, directly or indirectly,
of quantum computing services to any person located in Russia. U.S. Department of the Treasury,
Office of Foreign Assets Control, Determination Pursuant to Section 1(a)(ii) of Executive Order
14071: Prohibitions Related to Certain Quantum Computing Services, September 15, 2022.
   † The various ECCNs applicable to quantum include certain cryogenic CMOS integrated cir-
cuits, certain cryogenic cooling systems and components, certain cryogenic wafer probing equip-
ment, certain silicon, silicon oxides, germanium or germanium oxides, certain quantum comput-
ers, quantum computing-related electronic assemblies and components, and related software. U.S.
Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, “Commerce Control List Additions
and Revisions; Implementation of Controls on Advanced Technologies Consistent with Controls
Implemented,” Federal Register 89:173 (September 6, 2024).
   ‡ Dr. Parker et al. note in a 2022 publication that pieces of the quantum supply chain sourced
from China are generally low-cost, off-the-shelf products like electronics and optics as well as
some raw materials such as nonlinear crystals. Edward Parker et al., “An Assessment of the U.S.
and Chinese Industrial Bases in Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, February 2, 2022,
53, 150.
                                216

in biotechnology holds potential to be an accelerant on the pace of
discovery, for example by rapidly filling in gaps in researchers’ un-
derstanding of gene sequences.406 Though the full extent to which
fast-advancing subfields like synthetic biology and gene editing will
reshape the realm of possibilities using living organisms is not yet
clear, former Google CEO and Chairman and current Commission-
er on the National Security Commission on Emerging Biotechnol-
ogy Eric Schmidt said in April 2024 that we may be approaching
a “ChatGPT” moment for biotechnology, one as ground-shifting as
the breakthrough in generative AI in November 2022.407 The im-
portance of the technology has not been lost on China. A Chinese
Academy of Science official typified the strategic emphasis China
placed on biotechnology by stating, “As Europe won in the 19th cen-
tury using industry, and the United States won in the 20th century
using information technology, so China will win in the 21st using
biology.” 408 This section will examine the state of U.S.-China bio-
technology competition, China’s biotechnology ambitions, cases of
concern, and the potential risks for the United States.
China Rises up the Value Chain in Biopharma despite
     Lagging in Fundamental Research
  The CCP’s leadership has long viewed biotechnology—and in
particular biopharmaceuticals—as a critical technology, and it has
sought to become a leader in this field with massive state support
for the sector.409 Starting with the 12th Five-Year Plan (2011–2015),
the Chinese government shifted its strategy in the sector from one
focused on growing copycat manufacturing capabilities toward
one incentivizing innovation not just on pharmaceuticals but also
across agriculture and biomanufacturing.410 The “Made in China
2025” plan, a high-level Chinese policy document released in 2015,
identified “biomedicine and high-end medical equipment” and “new
materials, such as polymers” as two of the ten key sectors set for
state backing.411 The 14th Five-Year Plan for the Bioeconomy called
for investments in biotechnology across a range of industries to put
China “at the forefront globally” by 2035.412 Biotechnology has been
designated a strategic emerging industry by Beijing, and therefore
companies enjoy a host of preferential treatments, including tax
benefits, subsidies, and government procurement benefits.413 The
government has also supported development of high-tech science
parks where companies can cluster and have access to state-of-the-
art R&D facilities and equipment such as DNA sequencers.414
  Though traditionally a copycat and maker of generic drugs, China
has prioritized success in biopharma, investing in R&D infrastruc-
ture and supporting biotech companies that have captured key seg-
ments of the value chain for genomic sequencing and biopharma.415
Additionally, there are signs that the Chinese biopharma sector is
becoming more innovative, with metrics such as high-quality publi-
cations, patent filings, and approval of novel drugs on the rise.
  China’s efforts have resulted in some significant successes. With
regard to biopharma, China increased its share of global value add-
ed in pharmaceuticals from 5.6 percent in 2002 to 24.2 percent in
2019, surpassing the EU.416 China’s biotechnology sector has been
the recipient of sizable investment increases, with venture capital,
                                              217

equity funds, and IPOs providing funding to the tune of $216 billion
from 2015 to 2023.417 Seven of the world’s ten largest biopharma-
ceutical IPOs were by Chinese companies from 2018 to 2020, accord-
ing to McKinsey & Company, while the total combined market value
of China’s biopharmaceutical industry grew exponentially from $3
billion in 2016 to more than $380 billion in 2021.418
   Nevertheless, until very recently, China’s biotechnology indus-
try has struggled to deliver innovative new products, particularly
in biopharmaceuticals.419 Chinese funding has been geared more
toward experimental and translational research; China is not pri-
marily focusing on basic research, which remains an area in which
the United States leads.* 420 More than a dozen biotechnology ex-
perts interviewed by Bloomberg News argue that the persistent
lack of basic research in China has stymied domestic innovation
by failing to build the knowledge foundation on which to explore
novel applications.421 Academic researchers in China struggle
to collaborate with biotech firms to create high-end commercial
products, and as a result, Chinese biopharmaceutical firms have
produced very few truly innovative medicines.422 Many Chinese
biopharmaceutical firms continue to seek to “copycat” products
developed abroad.423 As a result, Chinese biopharma firms have
lagged behind in bringing novel therapeutics to market quickly,
as was the case with China’s mRNA COVID-19 vaccines, which
only gained approval in March 2023, two years after vaccines
developed in the United States.424
   With a robust life sciences innovation ecosystem comprising top
universities, venture capital funding, and industry leading firms, the
United States has long been the global leader in biopharmaceuticals
and non-pharmaceutical biotechnology. U.S.-headquartered biotech
firms lead in new drug development, producing twice as many new
chemical or biological entities as those in Europe between 2014 and
2018.425 U.S. firms received 62 percent of global venture capital
funding in biotechnology in 2020, a figure that declined from 69 per-
cent a decade earlier but still far exceeded China (19 percent) and
Europe (15 percent).† 426 Accounting for 40 percent of the world’s
total, the United States still publishes nearly double the Patent
  * From 2000 to 2019, 80 percent of China’s R&D expenditures were focused on experimental
development, using existing knowledge to improve products and processes, compared to 62 per-
cent in the same time period for the United States. This emphasis on translational research may
advantage China in developing products for defense and other critical sectors, altering human
genetic structures, and some other applications. As Michelle Rozo, vice chair of the National
Security Commission on Emerging Biotechnology, testified before the Commission, “A system
that funds translational research is better poised to realize applications in certain biotechnology
sectors, including agriculture, [industry], and defense. In a way, China is taking advantage of
American basic R&D by heavily funding translational research.” Michelle Rozo, written testimony
for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging
Technologies in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 2–3.
  † Funding activity for biotechnology in the United States boomed during the COVID-19 pan-
demic, with venture capital and IPO follow-on funding both peaking at over twice their pre-pan-
demic level in 2021 before falling off in 2022 and 2023. The collapse of Silicon Valley Bank in
March 2023 further constrained funding, with an estimated 50 percent of U.S. biotech companies
banking with the institution. There are signs in 2024 that the industry is recovering, driven by
factors like investment in weight loss drugs and a shifting focus from IPOs to mergers and ac-
quisitions (M&A) activity. Gwendolyn Wu, “Private Biotech M&A Surges amid Difficult IPO Mar-
ket,” Biopharma Dive, July 22, 2024; Chad Wessel, “The State of Emerging Biotech Companies:
Investment, Deal, and Pipeline Trends,” Biotechnology Innovation Organization, June 4, 2024;
Irena Maragkou, “Biotechs Ride Obesity Drug Wave with Novel Approaches That Go beyond GLP-
1Ras,” Pharmaceutical Technology, February 15, 2024; Nicholas Megaw, “US Biotech Fundraising
Boom Ends 2-Year Deal Drought,” Financial Times, February 12, 2024; Patrick Wingrove, “SVB
Fall Casts Shadow on Early-Stage U.S. Biotech,” Reuters, March 13, 2023.
                                 218

Cooperation Treaty (PCT) biotech-related patents as China.427 U.S.
biotechnology companies attracted $56.8 billion in total funding in
2023, 35 percent of the world’s total in comparison to $20.6 billion
to Chinese firms.428 There are positive trends for China, however.
Despite the U.S. lead in basic research, there are recent indications
that Chinese biotech is becoming more innovative in cutting-edge
research. In 2023, five first-in-class drugs were approved in China
and three by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, including the
first FDA-approved drug to treat nasopharyngeal cancer.429 There
were 33 licensing deals in 2024 between Chinese drug makers and
multinational enterprises.430 These are deals in which multination-
al companies license the IP created by a smaller company and typ-
ically signal some level of innovation in the product. The number of
licensing deals has more than doubled since 2019 and indicates the
increasing confidence of international companies in the quality of
Chinese innovations.431 The amount of high-quality scientific pub-
lications from Chinese academics has overtaken that of the United
States in certain subfields, including novel antibiotics and antivirals
and biomanufacturing.432 Chinese researchers have also made sig-
nificant strides in synthetic biology, the replication of living organ-
isms or creation of novel materials, therapeutics, or organisms.433
The Australian Strategic Policy Institute (ASPI) ranks Chinese re-
search in synthetic biology ahead of the United States in terms of
both the volume and quality of research published.434
   Additionally, Chinese biotech companies have become indus-
try leaders in genomic sequencing, mass production of precursors,
and intermediary services needed by innovative pharma and bio-
tech companies, capturing larger segments of the value chain as
contract research organizations (CROs), contract manufacturing or-
ganizations (CMOs), and contract development and manufacturing
organizations (CDMOs).435 A survey from Biotechnology Innovation
Organization, a trade association, found that of 124 U.S. biotech
companies that responded, 79 percent had at least one contract or
product agreement with firms based in China or owned by China for
services such as gene sequencing, data management, and conducting
clinical trials.436
Chinese Firms Become Major Players in Genomics
   China has significant capabilities in genomics. Genomics is the
study of an entire organism’s genetic sequence, including that of
humans.437 The Chinese government has a longstanding interest
in the development of genomics, funding its development since the
early 2000s.438 In 2023, the National Natural Science Foundation
under the State Council named Chinese research in genomics as one
of the “ten major advancements in Chinese science.” 439
   The ability to analyze vast quantities of genomic data has been
likened to the holy grail of drug discovery, while giving distinct ad-
vantages in healthcare for diagnosing medical conditions and in
determining predispositions for disease.440 Yet, genomics and syn-
thetic biology can also be used for malevolent purposes, such as sur-
veillance using bioindicators and to make more virulent pathogens
that may one day be capable of targeting subsections of populations
based on shared genetic signatures.441
                                 219

  China has significant advantages in genomic data. China has
pursued a comprehensive state-led effort to amass genetic data on
humans and living organisms around the world stored in a central
repository known as the China National GeneBank.442 Given the
nature of innovation in biotechnology, access to a massive amount of
genetic data could accelerate the pace of discovery and development
in emerging subfields like synthetic biology, providing the Chinese
R&D community an advantage in the next evolution of biotechnol-
ogy. The Chinese government designated genetic data as a national
strategic resource in 2022, and it restricts the transfer of genetic
information to parties outside of China.443
  Chinese firms are becoming main drivers in genomics research
and global leaders in providing genetic sequencing and related ge-
nomics services.444 Principal among these is BGI Group, which was
initially founded as the Beijing Genomics Institute in 1999 to serve
as China’s representative to the U.S.-led Human Genome Project, an
international research collaboration in sequencing human DNA.445
Over the subsequent two decades, BGI’s research has expanded from
mapping the human genome to groundbreaking research on map-
ping primate brains and sequencing blood samples to identify virus-
es.446 The firm has also made strides in developing low-cost genome
testing services and marketing them abroad, building a global brand
as a commercial genetic sequencing firm.447 As a global competitor
in genomics, BGI has grown to become one of the world’s largest
genetic sequencing firms by capacity, with $973 million (RMB 7.05
billion) in revenue in 2022.448 The company maintains offices and
research laboratories across the world, including in Europe, Japan,
and the United States, and has distributed testing products in at
least 80 countries.449 During the COVID-19 pandemic, BGI deployed
genetic testing labs in more than 20 countries around the world
capable of collecting genetic data, which has raised concerns that
China is engaged in a concerted effort to amass genetic data abroad
while walling off domestic data.450 As of October 2024, BGI’s market
capitalization was $2.6 billion, well behind industry leader Illumina
($23.7 billion) and other peer genomics companies, yet the compa-
ny has shown prowess in scaling globally and expanding market
share.451 BGI also runs China’s National GeneBank, overseeing
millions of genetic samples in cooperation with the National De-
velopment and Reform Commission and Ministry of Health, among
other Chinese government agencies.452 Amid this close government
collaboration, BGI has benefited from favorable state-led subsidies,
including a $1.5 billion ten-year loan from the state-controlled Chi-
na Development Bank.453
  Other Chinese firms are becoming leading firms in genomics,
too. Beijing-based Novogene has created a dominant presence in
next-generation genetic sequencing—DNA sequencing that provides
higher-volume, faster, and cheaper genetic sequencing capabilities—
completing 1.2 million samples as of 2021.454 To develop its genetic
sequencing capabilities, the firm has sought out research partner-
ships with U.S. partners, a pattern in Chinese-based biotech firms.455
This includes the establishment of a “genome sequencing center” on
the campus of University of California, Davis meant to research and
refine genetic sequencing capabilities.456 In 2022, Novogene also set
                                            220

up a genome sequencing facility in San Jose, California, positioning
it to offer genetic sequencing services to U.S. biotechnology firms in
Silicon Valley.457
China’s Biotech Industry Is Deeply Interconnected with U.S.
     Firms
   Chinese companies have become integral in U.S. pharmaceutical
supply chains, leading to dependencies and heightened risk of the
transfer of sensitive health data of U.S. citizens.* A few Chinese
companies do have significant globally competitive capabilities in
genomic sequencing and biotech services for innovative companies.
The virtues of an open and collaborative research environment be-
tween the United States and China have been extolled by many in
the scientific community, yet national security experts have raised
concerns particularly around the possible transfer of sensitive
health data of U.S. citizens, which could enable China’s technology
advancement and create vulnerabilities for Americans.458
   Chinese companies have been able to capture market share as pro-
viders of services such as genetic sequencing, offering intermediate
services and conducting clinical trials, lowering the cost and occupy-
ing a significant space in the biopharma supply chain in the United
States and globally. Despite growing evidence of collaboration with
the PLA, Chinese genomics firm BGI and other major internation-
al biotech player WuXi have longstanding operations in the United
States, enabling them to conduct U.S.-based R&D.459 Since 2010,
BGI has operated its BGI Americas laboratory in Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts, and in 2013 BGI acquired U.S.-based DNA sequencing
firm Complete Genomics.460 BGI was a main supplier of COVID-19
test kits in the United States, providing 35 million COVID-19 tests
to U.S. users by August 2020.† 461 Reporting from the Washington
Post in September 2023 details how BGI collected vast amounts of
genetic data from populations around the world during the pan-
demic by deploying its Fire-Eye labs—portable labs that analyzed
genetic samples for traces of COVID-19—in over 20 countries.462
BGI has also conducted extensive research collaborations with U.S.
firms and institutions, including partnerships with the University
of California and the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia on human
genome sequencing.463

   WuXi Group Raises Dependency and Security Concerns
   WuXi Group encompasses a constellation of integrated CROs
 and CDMOs known as contract research, development, and man-
 ufacturing organizations (CRDMOs) that specialize in services re-
 lated to drug development and production.464 WuXi has expanded
 market presence in the United States and Europe, with WuXi Bi-
 ologics and WuXi AppTech among the two largest subsidiaries.465

  * Chinese state-sponsored hackers were believed to have played a role in a hack of health-
care records on 80 million Americans in 2015. There is no known evidence indicating that data
from this attack have been used or made available within China for biomedical-related research.
Michael Riley and Jordan Robertson, “Chinese State-Sponsored Hackers Suspected in Anthem
Attack,” Bloomberg, February 5, 2015.
  † For more on BGI’s role in supplying COVID-19 testing kits, see U.S.-China Economic and Se-
curity Review Commission, Chapter 2, Section 2, “The Chinese Communist Party’s Economic and
Technological Ambitions,” in 2021 Annual Report to Congress, November 2021, 178–179.
                                             221

 WuXi Group Raises Dependency and Security Concerns—
                             Continued
 These firms have become integral to the U.S. pharmaceutical in-
 dustry: it is estimated that WuXi has been involved in developing
 one-fourth of the drugs currently used in the United States.466
 For example, it has developed key ingredients for drugs used in
 treatments for HIV, cystic fibrosis, obesity, and cancers like some
 types of leukemia and lymphoma.467 About two-thirds of WuXi
 AppTech’s revenue ($3.6 billion) came from the U.S. market in
 2023.* 468 As the firm has expanded its footprint in the United
 States, it has benefited from state and local subsidies, including
 an $11.5 million tax break to build a manufacturing plant in
 Massachusetts and a $19 million subsidy to build a manufactur-
 ing site in Delaware.469
    WuXi’s role in the U.S. drug development and manufacturing
 market raises significant concerns that a key U.S. industry has
 become reliant on a Chinese company with links to the PLA.† 470
 Many companies that contract with Chinese-based CRDMOs like
 WuXi Group have expressed concerns that a disruption in these
 contracts would present major setbacks for drug development
 timelines. One survey of 105 U.S. biotechnology companies found
 over 90 percent would expect delays in their development pipe-
 line if they were forced to switch from a China-based CRDMO
 and 64 percent saying this would constitute a “substantial slow-
 down.” 471 Another survey—as previously mentioned—from the
 trade group Biotechnology Innovation Organization (BIO) yielded
 similar results, with 79 percent of 124 biopharma companies sur-
 veyed saying they had at least one contract with a China-based or
 -owned CRDMO; the survey indicated that fully unwinding these
 partnerships would take up to eight years.472 This comes at a
 moment when the U.S. pharmaceutical industry is dealing with
 active drug shortages near all-time highs.473
    WuXi’s position in the drug development pipeline grants it po-
 tential access to U.S. clients’ proprietary IP and know-how.474
 Furthermore, the company’s recent expansion into genomics
 makes the collection of genetic data a core component of its ser-
 vices, raising concern over the potential transfer of genetic data
 of U.S. persons.475

  In light of both firms’ alleged ties to the Chinese military, U.S.
policymakers are seeking to limit their reach into the United States
   * In 2015, WuXi purchased an ownership stake in U.S. genetic sequencing firm 23andMe, which
company representatives claimed in 2021 amounted to less than 1 percent. For more on Chinese
firms investing in U.S. genetic sequencing firms, see U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Chapter 2, Section 2, “The Chinese Communist Party’s Economic and Technological
Ambitions,” in 2021 Annual Report to Congress, November 2021, 178; Julian E. Barnes, “U.S.
Warns of Efforts by China to Collect Genetic Data,” New York Times, October 22, 2021.
   † In June 2024, it was reported that WuXi AppTec employees were listed as co-inventors along-
side scientists from the PLA General Hospital in Beijing on at least ten patents for altitude
sickness drugs in recent years. This follows documented links between the company and the CCP
going back years, with one in seven of WuXi AppTec’s employees believed to be CCP members
in 2013. Kirsty Needham and Andrew Silver, “Staff at Drugmaker under U.S. Scrutiny Worked
with Chinese Military Scientists,” Reuters, June 6, 2024; Sunny Cheung, Arran Hope, and Peter
Mattis, “Red Genes: Assessing WuXi AppTec’s Ties to the Party-Army-State in China,” Jamestown
Foundation, February 9, 2024
                                222

and access to U.S. genetic data.476 In the last three years, the Com-
merce Department placed BGI subsidiaries on the BIS Entity List
and the Pentagon has labeled BGI a Chinese military company, both
moves that significantly limit BGI’s ability to work with U.S. firms
and to access U.S. technologies.477 Yet limiting these firms’ access
to the U.S. market poses challenges given their extensive network
of U.S. subsidiaries and partnerships and deep involvement in nu-
merous pharmaceutical R&D supply chains.478 For example, MGI
Group, which sells gene sequencing equipment in the United States,
avoided the first round of government sanctions on BGI despite be-
ing a subsidiary of BGI until being spun out in 2022.479 Although
the firm claims to be a “completely different company,” BGI’s founder
and chairman Wang Jian holds 47 percent of MGI shares following
MGI’s public listing.480 Members of Congress have called for MGI
to be named a “Chinese military company” along with other alleged
BGI subsidiaries that have avoided sanctions as of April 2024, in-
cluding genetic sequencing firms Innomics and STOmics.481
   Other Chinese biotech firms have also sought collaborations with
U.S. firms and research institutions. VCanBio Cell and Engineering
Corporation, which markets itself as China’s largest biotechnology
firm, boasts a 15,000-square-foot research center and a facility with
an explicit focus on translating advancements in biological research,
both near Boston.482 Another Chinese firm, QLB Biotherapeutics,
similarly oversees a biotech incubator in Boston, with QLB aiming
to invest in U.S. biotech startups housed in the incubator and to ac-
quire the rights to any therapeutics the Chinese-owned, U.S.-based
incubator produces.483
Chinese State Support Helped Create One of the World’s
     Largest Bio-Agriculture Companies
   China has pursued its biotechnology ambitions in bio-agriculture,
seeking to enhance agricultural processes to create higher yields
and stronger crop resiliency, benefits that are sought after in Chi-
na due to the country’s longstanding concerns surrounding food
insecurity.484 As Chinese companies have become major players in
an already highly concentrated global agribusiness industry, there
are growing concerns about overdependency. Chinese firms have
aggressively registered bio-agricultural patents and are now the
global leaders in government funding of agricultural R&D, accord-
ing to 2022 estimates by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Eco-
nomic Research Service.485 China’s progress in genome sequencing
and analysis, which can be leveraged in the agricultural industry
for genetically engineering agricultural products, is also gaining
ground.486 A 2022 study found Chinese scientists had published
more papers concerning crop genomics and plant gene editing tech-
nologies in recent years than any other country.487
   To achieve its bio-agricultural ambitions, the Party-state has
staunchly backed the growth of its largest state-owned firms.488 One
such state-owned company is ChemChina, China’s largest chemi-
cal company, which in 2017 purchased Swiss-based seed-producing
giant Syngenta, a leading firm in bio-agriculture.489 A major state
support component was included as part of the $44 billion acqui-
sition, with the Bank of China providing a $10 billion bond and
                                                223

another worth $7 billion coming from China Reform Holdings Corp,
a state-owned asset manager.490 Recent consolidation of global agri-
cultural companies has increased Syngenta’s market share, enabling
China to position itself strategically in the bio-agricultural sector.491
According to Michelle Rozo, vice chair of the National Security Com-
mission on Emerging Biotechnology, following ChemChina’s acqui-
sition of Syngenta, four companies now control large segments of
agricultural biotechnology and other agricultural inputs: U.S.-based
Corteva, German-based Bayer and BASF, and Syngenta.492 These
four firms are now responsible for the vast majority of pesticide and
seed treatment research and manufacturing.493 They also conduct
most global seed research, developing genetically engineered (GE) *
seeds that they themselves sell or license to other firms.† 494
   Chinese state ownership of Syngenta affords Beijing influence
over global agricultural markets, disadvantaging U.S. companies.
The Chinese government is both the key biotechnology regulator in
China and the owner of a major bio-agriculture firm that competes
with other firms it regulates, including U.S. firms.495 Therefore, Syn-
genta is in a privileged position of being owned by the same entity
that regulates matters vital to the firm’s success.496 This beneficial
regulatory relationship with the country’s largest domestic agricul-
tural firm occurs as Chinese regulators continue to stymie foreign
competitors.497 According to Dr. Rozo, the Chinese government rou-
tinely slows licensing for U.S. firms to market GE crops in China
and exploits samples of U.S.-produced GE seeds to develop domestic
competitors on a reduced timeline.498 This is a direct violation of
China’s WTO commitments and agreements made as part of the
Phase One trade deal, where Chinese authorities agreed to efficient-
ly review and approve U.S.-made biotechnology products.499 Accord-
ing to a report from the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative
(USTR), China’s lagging approval process of U.S.-made biotechnolo-
gy goods “remains among the most significant commitments under
the Phase One agreement for which China has not demonstrated
full implementation.” 500 In one instance of delayed licensing, after a
   * A genetically engineered organism refers to any organism that is modified using techniques to
directly transfer or remove genes in that organism, as opposed to the more common yet broader
category of genetically modified organism (GMO), encompassing organisms altered by GE or con-
ventional breeding. Canadian Biotechnology Action Network, “GM/GE Definition,” 2024.
   † The Chinese acquisition of Syngenta, which had to be cleared by the Committee on Foreign
Investment in the United States, also faced opposition by U.S. agricultural stakeholders on se-
curity grounds. Previously, Syngenta had led major research programs relevant to U.S. military
interests, particularly in biofuels. As highlighted in testimony by Dr. Rozo, now that Syngenta is a
Chinese SOE, it could withhold biofuel advancements from the U.S. military, a concern expressed
by domestic farming unions at the time of the ChemChina acquisition deal. Furthermore, several
of Syngenta’s U.S. agricultural facilities are near U.S. military facilities, raising concerns by some
that Syngenta’s ostensibly commercial research sites could serve as covert research sites near
U.S. national security activities. Following Syngenta’s acquisition by ChemChina, the state of
Arkansas announced investigations into Syngenta’s ownership of land in the state. After finding
that the company did not properly disclose its Chinese ownership, the company was ordered to
sell 160 acres of land. Nova J. Daly, written testimony before the Committee on Agriculture U.S.
House of Representatives, Chinese Acquisitions of U.S. Agriculture and Land Holdings and Con-
trol of Relevant U.S. Supply Chains: Addressing National Security Risks, March 20, 2024, 4, 7–9;
Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission,
Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Economic and National Security
Competition, February 1, 2024, 9; Neal Earley, “State Orders a Chinese-State Owned Syngenta
Seeds to Divest Ownership of Arkansas Farmland,” Arkansas Democrat Gazette, October 18, 2023;
Attorney General of Arkansas, Attorney General Griffin Orders Divestment of Chinese-Owned
Land and Imposes $280,000 Civil Penalty, October 17, 2023; Food & Water Watch, National Farm-
ers Union, “China National Chemical Corporation Proposed Purchase of Syngenta AG,” July 21,
2016, 12–14.
                                            224

decade-long wait, the Chinese government in 2023 finally approved
licenses for U.S. firm Corteva to market product grown in the Unit-
ed States using a GE canola seed.501 However, due to the delayed
timeline, that canola variety had become outdated.502
   Since acquiring Syngenta, the Chinese government continues
to assert its position in the global bio-agriculture sector. In 2020,
the State Council’s State-Owned Assets Supervision and Adminis-
tration Commission began combining agricultural assets of Chem-
China and other firms under the Syngenta name.503 The resulting
Chinese state-owned Syngenta is now the world’s largest seed and
agrochemicals conglomerate, with $27 billion of annual sales and
major markets across Europe, North America, Latin America, and
Africa.504 Since 2021, Syngenta has also reportedly been planning
a Shanghai IPO worth as much as $10 billion, which could provide
the firm with RMB liquidity to facilitate Chinese government-direct-
ed acquisitions of emergent bio-agricultural companies.* 505 If the
Syngenta case is illustrative, there may be further consolidation of
international bio-agricultural firms under direct Chinese state own-
ership.506

          AI May Enhance China’s Biotech Ambitions
    Chinese breakthroughs in biotech for both commercial and mil-
 itary sectors can be propelled by AI and advances in machine
 learning, according to Dr. Rozo’s testimony before the Commis-
 sion.507 AI and machine learning can be applied to assist in an-
 alyzing genetic codes, conducting image analysis for agriculture
 and medical diagnostics, and running autonomous experimenta-
 tion to accelerate the speed of cutting-edge technological develop-
 ment.508 Dr. Rozo testified that nearly every area of biology has
 advanced through the use of AI/machine learning tools and will
 continue to do so as the data and models improve.509 Chinese
 firms already claim to be benefiting from this AI-biotech nex-
 us.510 Insilico Medicine, with headquarters in Hong Kong, claims
 to have used AI in pharmaceutical development to reduce a mul-
 tiyear discovery process down to 18 months and at a fraction of
 the cost.511 BioMap, a biotech firm with headquarters in Beijing,
 claims to have developed an AI Foundation Model with over 100
 billion parameters to speed drug discovery.512
    A key aspect of the AI-biotech nexus is quality data. Accord-
 ing to the U.S. National Counterintelligence and Security Cen-
 ter, China “has enacted national policies prioritizing the collec-
 tion of healthcare data both at home and abroad to achieve its
 goal of becoming a global biotech leader” and has collected large
 datasets from the United States and other countries.513 Dr. Rozo
 argues that thanks to government support, China’s biotech eco-
 system may be better suited than the United States to utilize
 AI and other emerging technologies to advance biotech research,
 particularly given its National Genome Sequencing Data Center
 and BGI’s significant role in providing genomic sequencing ser-

  * As of March 2024, that IPO is currently withdrawn at the direction of Chinese authorities
due to weakness in Chinese equity markets. Reuters, “Exclusive: Beijing Nudged Syngenta to
Withdraw $9 billion Shanghai IPO on Market Weakness,” April 3, 2023.
                                               225

   AI May Enhance China’s Biotech Ambitions—Continued
 vices.514 Similarly, WuXi Apptec’s role in numerous biotech sup-
 ply chains provides WuXi access to a wide variety of otherwise
 proprietary data. “It appears that the Chinese system is better
 oriented towards convergent [AI-enhanced biotech] research,” Dr.
 Rozo testified, and “the Chinese government has been prioritizing
 this intersection at a national level for years, while the U.S. Gov-
 ernment has yet to do so at the same scale.” 515

Batteries: China’s State Support Powers Growing Market
     Dominance
  From powering EVs to supporting the U.S. power grid, battery
technology plays an increasingly crucial role in the U.S. economy
and military readiness.516 The U.S. battery market, already esti-
mated at $16.9 billion in 2023, is expected to more than double by
2030 with the transition to battery-powered vehicles and the instal-
lation of more batteries in energy systems.517 In contrast to the oth-
er technologies examined in this chapter where the United States
and China are competing to gain a clear advantage, China currently
dominates nearly all stages of battery production.518 Six out of the
world’s top ten battery producers are based in China, accounting
for 77 percent of global production capacity * as of 2022, compared
to just 6 percent for the United States.519 This advantage is set to
continue, with energy data firm BloombergNEF projecting that by
2025 and beyond, China will maintain at least three times as much
battery production capacity as the rest of the world combined.520
With China’s leading role in battery production, the United States
has become increasingly dependent on China for finished batteries
as well as battery technology, components, and materials.521 Despite
recent attempts to reduce U.S. reliance on Chinese batteries, China
remains the leading battery exporter to the United States, account-
ing for over 70 percent of lithium-ion batteries imported in 2023 by
price and over 50 percent of all electric storage batteries, including
separators and parts.522
China’s Dominance in the Battery Supply Chain
  China has attained a sizable advantage at each stage of the
battery supply chain, from upstream mining of raw materials, to
midstream processing and fabrication of components, and finally to
downstream assembly and production of finished batteries.523 In its
14th Five-Year Plan for Raw Material Industry Development, China
describes raw materials as the “foundation of the real economy” and
a “main battlefield for industrial green development.” 524 China’s
success in battery manufacturing stems in large part from its lead-
ing position in producing and processing critical minerals.† 525 As

  * Production capacity refers to the maximum potential manufacturing capacity a country can
produce of a given good; for batteries, it is measured in gigawatt hours (GWh).
  † Critical minerals currently include 50 minerals and elements considered essential to the eco-
nomic or national security of the United States. They are vulnerable to supply chain disruptions
and are used in manufacturing of a product that, if curtailed, would have significant consequenc-
es for U.S. interests (e.g., lithium, cobalt, graphite, gallium, germanium, nickel, tin, etc.). U.S.
Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey, What Is A Critical Mineral?
                                 226

of January 2024, China is responsible for 60 percent of the world’s
rare earths mining production, a subset of critical minerals crucial
not only for battery production but also for defense technologies,
including missiles, lasers, and tanks.526
   Chinese firms have augmented their significant domestic pro-
cessing and refining of rare earths by securing mining agreements
with resource-rich countries to secure supply of the critical minerals
used in batteries.527 Nickel, lithium, and cobalt are vital inputs for
battery manufacturing for which China lacks substantial domes-
tic resources.528 In 2022, China signed a $14 billion deal to mine
nickel in Indonesia and a $422 million deal for lithium mining in
Zimbabwe, complementing existing agreements in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where Chinese firms own 80 percent of cobalt
mining.529 Chinese firms continue to expand control of the global
critical mineral mining industry. According to GlobalData, the num-
ber of planned critical mineral mines either under development or
set for exploration by Chinese companies outside of China is set to
more than double to 89, up from the 40 currently in operation.530
Many of these planned mines are set to operate in developing Belt
and Road Initiative member countries in Africa and Southeast Asia,
where Chinese investment in metals and mining is reaching record
highs.531
   In line with government directives for rare earth and raw ma-
terial enterprises to consolidate and extend their industrial chains
further downstream, China has also invested heavily in refining ca-
pabilities, constructing factories domestically and abroad to bolster
and enhance its ability to process the materials needed to produce
batteries.532 China now processes and refines 90 percent of the
world’s rare earths and a significant portion of other critical miner-
als needed for lithium-ion batteries, including 95 percent of manga-
nese, 70 percent of cobalt and graphite, 66 percent of lithium, and
over 60 percent of nickel.533 This includes a Chinese-owned $300
million lithium processing plant in Zimbabwe that reportedly has
the capacity to process 4.5 million metric tons of hard rock lithium
annually for export; Zimbabwe has one of the largest concentrations
of lithium reserves in Africa.534 According to Rodrigo Castillo and
Caitlin Purdy at the Brookings Institution, China’s state-owned in-
vestment bank CITIC also boosts China’s refining capabilities by
channeling government funds to support Chinese firms, including
Chengdu-based Tianqi’s overseas lithium refining operations.535 At
the same time China is investing in refining capabilities, efforts
to upgrade resource-refining capabilities in the United States and
Europe are facing pushback due to health and environmental con-
cerns.536
   Downstream, China is further solidifying its lead in battery man-
ufacturing. China has invested heavily in manufacturing battery
components and with subsidies for battery manufacturing compa-
nies for years.537 The Chinese government has designated the bat-
tery and EV industry as an industry of strategic importance since at
least 2010, when it was specifically identified as a matter of priority
by the State Council.538 Support for the development of the “new
energy vehicle” industry was included in the 12th Five-Year Plan
(2011–2015), in the Energy-Saving and New Energy Vehicle Indus-
                                            227

try Development Plan (2012–2020), and as one of the ten industrial
priorities in Made in China 2025.539 The most recent 14th Five-Year
Plan (2021–2025) names new energy vehicles as a strategic emerg-
ing industry, and a New Energy Vehicle Industry Development Plan
(2021–2035) outlines advancement objectives in efficiency, global
market share, and integration of autonomous driving systems.540 A
2024 report from the Center for Strategic and International Studies
estimates that between 2009 and 2023, Chinese government sup-
port for the EV and battery industry totaled at least $230.9 billion,
equivalent to 18.8 percent of total EV sales of Chinese car compa-
nies.541 The subsidization has continued, even as China dominates
global battery production. Notably, Fujian-based Contemporary Am-
perex Technology Co., Ltd. (CATL) received $391 million (RMB 2.85
billion) in government support over the first six months of 2023.542
This constituted a nearly threefold increase in government subsidies
year-over-year for a company that comprises 36.8 percent of global
market share of batteries for EVs.543
  Buoyed by strong government backing, as of 2023, Chinese firms
produced 77 percent of all battery cathodes produced globally, 74
percent of separators, 82 percent of electrolytes, and 92 percent of
anodes at a fraction of the cost compared to U.S. competitors.* 544
This environment has also allowed Chinese battery makers to devel-
op batteries key to powering future cutting-edge products.545 For ex-
ample, a new condensed battery produced by CATL claims to main-
tain an energy density of up to 500 watt-hours per kilogram (Wh/
kg).546 This is an energy density above the projected requirements
needed to power a future fully electrified airplane.547 Meanwhile,
Chinese breakthroughs in solid-state batteries are set to broaden
the efficiency and duration with which Chinese automotive manu-
facturers can power the newest generation of EVs.548 With such an
extensive array of subsidies and existing market dominance of near-
ly all battery components, Chinese firms are poised to continue dom-
inating global battery markets, including in the United States.549

                    China’s Dominance in EVs
   As automotive firms increasingly focus on the production of
 EVs, China’s car manufacturers are well positioned. The global
 EV market, which already grew from $384.65 billion in 2022 to
 $500.48 billion in 2023, is projected by Fortune Business Insights
 to more than triple by 2030, with significant growth in the Asia
 Pacific.550 About 60 percent of total EV batteries sold globally in
 2022 were made in China.551 This creates dependencies on Chi-
 nese-produced EV batteries for U.S. automakers, while Chinese
 EV manufacturers work to vertically integrate domestic battery
 production into their supply chains in order to solidify first mover
 advantages and ascend the ranks of global auto manufacturers.552
   According to the Center for Strategic and International Stud-
 ies, China’s investment in EV batteries has been backed by about

  * Most batteries comprise the same basic components, including positively charged cathodes,
negatively charged anodes, electrolytes made up of lithium salts needed for conductivity, and
a porous separator to prevent the positive and negative sides from touching. Agnes Chang and
Keith Bradsher, “Can the World Make an Electric Car Battery without China?” New York Times,
May 16, 2023; Shawn Hymel, “What Is a Battery?” Sparkfun.
                               228

           China’s Dominance in EVs—Continued
$130 billion in government-led research incentives, government
contracts, and consumer subsidies.553 While Chinese battery sub-
sidies consistently cost the Chinese government billions of dollars
a year, they combine with relatively low labor costs and signifi-
cant manufacturing expertise to allow Chinese firms to produce
battery packs for EVs at a cost of $127 per kilowatt hour com-
pared to their North American and European competitors, whose
costs are 24 percent and 33 percent higher, respectively.554 Chi-
nese EV battery factories can also be constructed at a price more
than $200 million less than a potential counterpart in Europe.555
   While some countries are seeking to diversify away from Chi-
nese batteries, this is costly in the near term. BloombergNEF es-
timates that the EU and the United States would need to spend
$98 billion and $82 billion each in initial manufacturing construc-
tion alone to meet domestic battery demand in order to cut their
market reliance on China.556 The EU further estimates it will
need to spend an additional $412 billion (€382 billion) across the
entire battery supply chain to eliminate its reliance on Chinese
battery imports and achieve self-sufficiency by 2030.557 As a re-
sult of China’s dominant position in EV battery making, most
global EV makers are set to continue to depend on China—at
least in the short term—including Tesla, which relies on China
for 40 percent of its battery supply chain.558
   Major Chinese EV manufacturers, like BYD, have capitalized
on China’s battery manufacturing advantages.559 Unlike U.S.
competitors, BYD controls nearly all aspects of its battery supply
chain.560 The firm, which was founded as a battery manufactur-
ing business, owns over 20 battery-making plants in China, in-
cluding one of the world’s largest battery-making plants with a
24-gigawatt-hour (GWh) capacity in Qinghai Province.561 BYD’s
stakes in resource mining allow the firm to lock in discounts in
sourcing raw materials to make batteries.562 Like other Chinese
firms, BYD has benefited from strong government support, with
direct subsidies of over $3.7 billion between 2018 and 2022, ac-
cording to the Kiel Institute.563 Amid this generous state support,
BYD has plans to open more battery factories and consolidate
much of its upstream battery-manufacturing sourcing, including
gaining ownership stakes in lithium mining operations, exploring
joint ventures in nickel mining, and developing sodium-ion bat-
teries.564
   Chinese firms are now poised to dominate global sales of EVs.
One estimate finds that Chinese EVs are set to account for one-
third of global market share by the end of this decade, increas-
ing market share outside of China from 3 percent in 2024 to 13
percent in 2030.565 BYD has become a major player in the global
EV market, dominating domestic and foreign firms in China’s EV
market while surpassing Tesla in global sales of battery EVs in
the last quarter of 2023, thanks to Chinese government support
and strong domestic supply chains.566 Other Chinese EV firms al-
ready operating at home in what is the world’s largest automotive
market have established beachheads abroad and are surging in
                                229

            China’s Dominance in EVs—Continued
 international EV markets. Hangzhou-based Geely Auto reported
 a 48 percent year-on-year increase in 2023 EV sales, with more
 than 270,000 Geely EVs sold outside of China.567 State-owned
 SAIC reported an 18.8 percent increase in its 2023 overseas EV
 sales year-over-year and has unveiled plans to begin promoting
 14 new EV models for foreign markets by 2025.568
   Many countries will gladly accept China’s low-cost EVs, indicat-
 ing that China’s market share is likely to increase and ultimately
 displace existing suppliers in those markets, a development likely
 to cut into the revenue of U.S. automakers from sales overseas.
 Some countries have resisted them over concerns that China’s
 massive subsidies for the sector have created unfair competition.
 The United States and Canada in 2024 both announced a 100
 percent tariff on EVs imported from China, and the EU imposed
 tariffs ranging from 17 to 38 percent on top of the existing 10
 percent tariff on all imported cars.569 Brazil, which became the
 largest import market for Chinese EVs in 2024, is in the process
 of gradually increasing tariffs on imported vehicles from zero to
 35 percent by 2026 in order to protect domestic industry.570

Batteries as Key Components of Global Electrical Grids
   Chinese batteries also play a crucial role in providing electrical
storage equipment for power grids worldwide, including in the Unit-
ed States. China is increasingly supporting and subsidizing what
it calls “new-type energy storage systems” (NTESS), energy sys-
tems that use novel technologies to store and distribute power, such
as battery energy storage systems (BESS), compressed air energy
storage, and flywheel systems, among others.571 As of 2023, Chi-
na’s installed NTESS capacity stood at 13.1 gigawatts (GW), with
lithium-ion batteries utilized in these systems accounting for 28.7
percent of the world’s total deployed power capacity for lithium-ion
batteries.572 These energy storage systems are central to China’s
five-year plans at both the national and provincial level, with tar-
gets to reach 100 GW in cumulative battery storage capacity by
2030.573 In contrast, the United States had a total energy storage
system capacity of 17 GW by the end of 2023.574 With China the
global leader in energy storage systems, the United States imported
a record 841,573 metric tons of lithium-ion batteries in 2023, mostly
from China.575 This constituted a 32.9 percent rise from 2022 and
marked the third straight year U.S. battery imports have risen by
over 30 percent.576
   Utility-scale batteries are increasingly necessary to support U.S.
energy storage stations, especially as they integrate more power gen-
erated by alternative energy like wind and solar.577 Leading China’s
entrance into U.S. battery energy storage systems is Fujian-based
battery firm CATL, whose battery-backed energy storage systems
are being rapidly installed into the U.S. electric grid.578 According
to Craig Singleton, China program director and senior fellow at the
Foundation for Defense of Democracies, several CATL-supported
BESS projects are under construction or have already been complet-
                                            230

ed in the United States, including a March 2022 CATL battery-sup-
ported BESS project in Florida and an August 2022 project near
Richmond, Virginia.579 Nevada-based firm Primergy Solar entered
into a sole battery supply agreement with CATL in October 2022,
which is set to be among the largest solar and storage projects in
the United States.580
   CATL’s rapid expansion in the U.S. electrical storage market
comes at a time when energy storage batteries are increasingly key
to the U.S. grid’s function.581 In the second quarter of 2024, energy
companies connected nearly 4 GW * of battery storage to the United
States grid, up 87.3 percent year-on-year and bringing total capac-
ity to 23.8 GW.582 CATL batteries are well positioned to underpin
Texas’s power grid, where battery storage makes up nearly 60 per-
cent of new energy projects seeking to connect to the grid, far more
than any other energy storage source.583 This battery dependency in
energy grids is only expected to grow. Texas currently has 4 GW of
energy battery storage for its grid; this will rise each of the next two
summers to reach a total of 12–14 GW.584 CATL has major contracts
in Texas, including an agreement with Texas-based HGP Storage to
produce up to 5 GWh † of energy to support the Texas power grid.585
   Mr. Singleton argues that the integration of CATL batteries into
the U.S. electrical grid creates potential vulnerabilities to hacking,
intelligence gathering, and disruption from China.586 Due to vulner-
abilities in EV charging networks, EVs themselves, and BESS-re-
lated systems, hardware manufacturers could compromise EVs,
charging networks, electric grids, and industrial control systems.587
Mr. Singleton acknowledges that “it is challenging to ascertain the
precise likelihood of such attacks, [but] the potential exists.” 588 An-
other report from Aon, a cybersecurity advisory firm, similarly iden-
tifies vulnerabilities in BESS systems, finding that their operating
systems and components can be out of date and lacking in sophisti-
cated security measures.589 Should these vulnerabilities be exploit-
ed, they could be deeply disruptive to the energy systems in which
they are embedded.590 In his report, Mr. Singleton indicates that
previous cyberattacks have already targeted energy systems, such
as a 2022 ransomware attack on India’s Tata Power, one of the coun-
try’s largest integrated power companies.591 He warns that in the
worst-case scenarios, such attacks could carry grave consequences,
including potential blackouts of critical industrial areas and major
financial hubs.592 The Aon report further identifies risks of lithi-
um-ion batteries themselves that underpin BESS systems. These
batteries require careful oversight and control for their voltage and
temperature.593 Should a threat actor interfere, these battery cells
could rapidly degrade or, in the case of extreme interference, a re-
mote attack could trigger a significant fire or explosion at the site
of the BESS system with potentially broader consequences for the
local grid, a point echoed by Dr. Jeffrey Nadaner, former Deputy

  * One GW is equivalent to 1,000 megawatts and represents roughly the same energy output of
two coal-fired powerplants, enough to power 750,000 homes in the United States. Mary Pressler,
“The US Installs 15.1 Gigawatts of Generation So Far in 2022,” Quick Electricity, September 1,
2022; Dana Hull, “California Hits Renewable Energy Milestone: 1 Gigawatt of Solar Power In-
stalled to Date,” Mercury News, November 8, 2011.
  † A gigawatt hour (GWh) is a flow measurement of electrical output over one hour. 1 GW of
installed capacity produces 1 GWh of electricity in an hour, 168 GWh in a week, and 8,760 GWh
over one year.
                                              231

Assistant Secretary of Defense for Industrial Policy, in testimony
before the Commission.* 594
  These battery storage systems are complemented by other Chinese
equipment also being installed in the U.S. power grid. As Joe Weiss
describes in Control, from 2006 through 2023, the United States has
imported around 450 transformers over 10,000 kilo-volt-amperes
(kVA) from China.595 More than 360 of these Chinese-made trans-
formers were large transmission systems over 100,000 kVA that are
key to operating the electrical grid.596 Mr. Weiss warns that despite
some executive action † to limit foreign influence in the electrical
grid, U.S. utility firms continue to buy Chinese equipment, including
more than 125 large Chinese transformers since 2020.597 Chinese
energy storage batteries and related equipment are increasingly in-
stalled in U.S. power networks.
Batteries Linger in U.S. Networks
   Despite efforts to remove Chinese batteries from some U.S. critical
networks, such as the U.S. military’s ban on buying Chinese batter-
ies, Chinese-produced batteries remain critical parts of the supply
chain for the U.S. government.598 According to Dr. Nadaner’s testi-
mony before the Commission, between 2018 and 2023, 1,503 battery
suppliers to U.S. government agencies relied on Chinese components
in their supply chain, more than double Japan (462) and Germany
(392), the second and third leading component suppliers.599 Last
year, Chinese-produced industrial batteries were unplugged at
Camp Lejeune due to congressional concerns of the potential risks
these batteries posed to disrupting the military installation’s pow-
er supply and energy infrastructure.600 Experts claim that a BESS
system such as the one installed at Camp Lejeune requires frequent
remote operation and that telecommunications equipment connect-
ed to the batteries could be vulnerable to hacking attempts.601 Pre-
ceding the batteries’ removal, 27 lawmakers signed a letter warning
that “CATL could introduce malware into large-scale power storage
stations, threatening the U.S. energy grid” and that the presence of
CATL batteries in U.S. military installations and critical infrastruc-
ture “raise[s] several concerns that a malicious actor, or govern-
ment, could seek to exploit.” 602 Mike Casey, director of the National
Counterintelligence and Security Center, further warns against the
risks introduced by Chinese battery storage systems: “We encour-
age power companies interested in using these industrial battery
energy storage systems from China to think beyond the short-term
cost savings they may realize and consider the potential long-term
vulnerabilities and how to mitigate them.” 603
  * The simultaneous detonation of Hezbollah devices in Lebanon in September 2024 demonstrat-
ed the feasibility of prepositioning in a network and carrying out a coordinated remote sabotage
strike. Though the context in which this attack occurred and the tactical approach are unique,
the event underscores the imperative to ensure remote backdoor capabilities are not built into
battery systems in U.S. networks, given these systems’ inherent explosive quality. Bruce Schneier,
“Israel’s Pager Attacks Have Changed the World,” New York Times, September 22, 2024; Craig
Singleton, “Beijing’s Power Play,” Foundation for Defense of Democracies, October 23, 2023.
  † Executive Order 13920, signed May 1, 2020, by the Trump Administration, directed the U.S.
Department of Energy to lead interagency efforts to ensure purchases of bulk power systems
used in the U.S. electrical grid from entities controlled by a foreign adversary did not pose un-
acceptable national security risk. The executive order has since been suspended by the Biden
Administration. Joe Weiss, “The U.S. Electric Industry Is Not Responding to Cyber-Vulnerable
Chinese Equipment,” Control, February 29, 2024; Executive Office of the U.S. President, “Securing
the United States Bulk-Power System,” Federal Register 85:26595 (May 4, 2020).
                                              232

U.S. Efforts to Restrict Chinese EVs
   With greater U.S. investments to transition from carbon-based
energy sources, the Biden Administration is moving to prevent U.S.
firms from opting for widely available Chinese-made energy tech-
nology, particularly in the transportation sector. In December 2023,
the Administration explicitly restricted Chinese EV suppliers from
receiving tax credits and incentives from the Inflation Reduction Act
by designating them as a Foreign Entity of Concern (FEOC).* 604
The raft of tariff increases the Administration announced in May
2024 brings the rate on Chinese EVs under Section 301 up from 25
percent to 100 percent and on Chinese batteries from 7.5 percent
to 25 percent, citing unfair subsidies and rapid growth of Chinese
exports as threatening to U.S. producers.605
   Despite growing scrutiny, U.S. firms have maintained partner-
ships with Chinese battery producers. For example, Ford announced
in February 2023 that it would start producing low-cost lithium-ion
batteries by 2026 at its plant in Michigan using technology licensed
from CATL.606 This illustrates one of the main challenges for U.S.
industries seeking to reduce reliance on Chinese batteries. Even if
the United States reduces dependencies on physical Chinese bat-
teries, China continues to dominate battery supply chains and even
research in battery technology, publishing about half of the world’s
research on battery efficiency.607 As a result, Chinese firms often
maintain an edge over U.S. competitors in technology, IP, and know-
how in battery manufacturing.608 Ford is therefore in an unenviable
position of licensing state-of-the art CATL technology and IP, even
as the Administration seeks to limit the reach of Chinese battery
makers in the United States.609 The planned partnership appears
set to proceed amid bipartisan congressional concerns and the Ad-
ministration’s new rules, which do not directly prohibit the Ford-
CATL agreement.610

       Internet of Things (IoT) Raises Growing Concern
    There is rising concern of potential security threats to U.S. net-
 works associated with Chinese-made devices.611 In recent years,
 the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has placed ten
 Chinese companies—including Huawei, ZTE, and Hangzhou
 Hikvision Digital Technology—on its Covered List that prevents
 the marketing, sale, or operation of any equipment within the
 United States due to national security risks.612 Recent attention
 has focused on cellular modules produced by Chinese companies,
 which connect IoT † devices to the internet that have the poten-
 tial to be remotely accessed and controlled from China.613 Chi-

  * Under the rules set to be implemented over 2024, companies will be denied tax credits if ve-
hicle batteries contain components that were manufactured or assembled by an FEOC. Beginning
in 2025, the rules expand in scope to disqualify any vehicles whose batteries contain any critical
minerals extracted, processed, or recycled by an FEOC. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Trea-
sury Releases Proposed Guidance to Continue U.S. Manufacturing Boom in Batteries and Clean
Vehicles, Strengthen Energy Security, December 1, 2023.
  † An IoT device could connect any electronic device to the internet, such as vehicles and home
appliances. David Shepardson, “US FCC Chair Says China’s Quectel, Fibocom May Pose National
Security Risks,” Reuters, September 6, 2023; U.S. House of Representatives Select Committee on
the Strategic Competition between the United States and the Chinese Communist Party, Letter
to FCC Chair on Chinese Internet Connectivity Modules, August 8, 2023.
                                            233

     Internet of Things (IoT) Raises Growing Concern—
                            Continued
 na’s government has sustained policies to boost IoT development,
 including accelerating IoT research and applications in the State
 Council’s “Made in China 2025” plan released in 2015.614 China is
 one of the largest producers of IoT equipment globally, with three
 Chinese companies, Quectel (37.1 percent), Fibocom (6.9 percent),
 and China Mobile (6.8 percent), collectively holding about half of
 the global market as of the first quarter in 2024.615 In Septem-
 ber 2023, the FCC reportedly raised security concerns about two
 Chinese IoT module companies, Fibocom and Quectel, to U.S. gov-
 ernment agencies with the relevant authority to consider whether
 they pose national security risks.* 616

  The United States is separately considering measures to address
potential privacy, data security, and cyber security concerns associ-
ated with Chinese-made EVs. Similar to the concerns raised by Mr.
Singleton, independent cybersecurity researchers have demonstrat-
ed the ability of Chinese-made EVs and EV charging equipment
to collect and transmit data back to China and install malware.617
In February 2024, the Commerce Department issued an Advanced
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking to address threats stemming from
“connected vehicles” from China.618 On September 23, 2024, BIS
released a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking to address security con-
cerns from connected vehicles that, if finalized, will prohibit the
sale or import of certain types of Chinese hardware and software
integrated into vehicle connectivity systems and automated driving
systems to take effect for model years 2027 and 2030, dependent on
the type of technology.619
Implications for the United States
  U.S.-China technology competition is foundational to both U.S.-Chi-
na economic competition and national security. China has realized
the importance of technology supremacy for decades and consistent-
ly implemented policies designed to gain an edge in technologies of
the future. If China surpasses the United States in the development
and deployment of these technologies at scale, industries critical for
the United States and its allies could become overly reliant on Chi-
na, and the balance of regional and global power could shift in the
PLA’s favor. The United States has already begun to take aggressive
steps to ensure continued U.S. technological leadership in these sec-
tors through domestic investments, export controls, and investment
restrictions, and it is considering other policies, but some hurdles
remain.
  Advanced computing technology, including AI, is at the forefront
of U.S.-China technology competition. AI will add tremendous value
to the global economy and reshape a swath of industries. AI also has
  * Quectel refuted concerns raised regarding the security of its modules. In a press release,
Quectel Wireless Solutions stated that “Quectel customers own the data, and [Quectel has] no
access to any of the data collected.” Business Wire, “Quectel Response to FCC about IoT Module
Security,” September 7, 2023; David Shepardson, “US FCC Chair Says China’s Quectel, Fibocom
May Pose National Security Risks,” Reuters, September 6, 2023.
                                 234

the potential to transform the military balance between the Unit-
ed States and China by helping both militaries improve their data
analysis, accelerate battlefield decision-making, and more effective-
ly target the adversary.620 One key to AI competition is advanced
semiconductors, where the United States has a lead but China is
investing heavily to catch up. Separately, there is a risk that China
may flood the world with cheap legacy semiconductors, forcing pric-
es down, which may threaten the viability of other countries’ legacy
semiconductor industries and provide China with significant global
economic leverage. Another aspect of competition in AI is the quality
and performance of AI models. Amid a vigorous debate within the
AI industry over whether open source or closed source models are
the better approach, entities in China have been using U.S. open
source models as the basis for some of their technological advances.
There is not currently a U.S. policy framework that focuses on the
differences between the two approaches for U.S.-China technology
competition. Moreover, experts have also expressed concern over the
need to address cloud computing, a key potential workaround that
could allow Chinese firms or even the PLA itself to access highly
advanced AI and quantum computing capabilities located in dif-
ferent countries and delivered remotely via the cloud.621 While ex-
isting controls on AI have limited such access to a certain extent,
technological change, developments in global markets, and evolving
Chinese policy responses all underscore the importance of regularly
reviewing U.S. export controls and related policies.
   While practical breakthroughs from QIS are generally yet to be
realized, the potentially profound economic and national security
implications of such technologies require close scrutiny. The country
that has the edge in quantum technologies will be able to protect
its communications networks from eavesdropping and interception,
break adversaries’ encryption methods, bolster its scientific research,
and deploy advanced sensing capabilities to detect enemy military
assets.622 To date, the U.S. export control policy response for QIS
has been limited, at least in part because defense applications have
been viewed as less achievable within the short to medium term
for most aspects of QIS other than quantum sensing.623 Unlike the
advanced semiconductor controls used for AI, U.S. quantum tech-
nology controls primarily only target specific Chinese end users in-
stead of the other enabling technology categories. Questions remain
regarding the effectiveness of the end user approach, the utility of
broader controls on enabling technologies and access to R&D and
know-how, and potential opportunities for multilateral cooperation
with allies.624
   U.S.-China competition in biotechnology will have significant eco-
nomic impacts in terms of capabilities in numerous technologies and
manufacturing industries of the future, and for some applications
it will have direct national security implications. In addition, ge-
nomic-related biotechnologies raise concerns about data collection,
including access to sensitive health and genetic data on U.S. citizens
and abuse for surveillance purposes. At the same time, many appli-
cations of biotechnology would provide overall benefits to health-
care, medicine, and related technologies, and traditionally, coopera-
tive scientific research in such fields has been supported. While the
                                  235

United States leads in many areas of innovation in biotechnology,
Chinese biotechnology companies such as BGI and WuXi have be-
come integral in U.S. genomic and pharmaceutical supply chains,
raising concerns over dependency for medical and agricultural prod-
ucts. Furthermore, these companies are obtaining advantages over
time due to their access to sensitive data and proprietary commer-
cial information, an area of particular concern given their alleged
ties to the PLA.
   Finally, the rapid expansion and dominant position China has
attained in the global battery industry presents an expansive
challenge for policymakers in an emerging technology with major
implications for the transition to clean and renewable energy sys-
tems. With China’s overwhelming presence throughout the battery
production supply chain, Chinese companies are poised to maintain
substantial advantages and market share for powering clean energy
technologies that rely on batteries, likely requiring U.S. manufactur-
ers to rely on suppliers and IP from China at least for the short and
medium term.625 Moreover, the proliferation of Chinese batteries
within U.S. networks, including vital energy infrastructures, creates
cyber security-related concerns, vulnerabilities to remote manipu-
lation, and sabotage. Experts indicate that Chinese-made batteries
heighten the risk of espionage or unforeseen energy supply disrup-
tions and system failures as they become further integrated into
critical U.S. operations.626 Recent U.S. policies have taken limited
steps to address these challenges, specifically provisions in the Infla-
tion Reduction Act incentivizing domestic production of clean energy
vehicles and the recent Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking to
study risks from connected vehicles and associated systems.
                                         236
                        ENDNOTES FOR CHAPTER 3
   1. Xinhua, “(Authorized Release by the Two Sessions) When Xi Jinping Visited
during His Visit to the Members of the Joint Committee of Civil Construction, Indus-
try and Commerce Who Attended the CPPCC Meeting, He Emphasized the Correct
Guidance of Healthy and High-Quality Development of the Private Economy. Wang
Huning, Cai Qiding, and Xue Xiang Participated in the Visit and Discussion” (两会
受权发布)习近平在看望参加政协会议的民建工商联界委员时强调 正确引导民营经济健康发
展高质量发展 王沪宁蔡奇丁薛祥参加看望和讨论), March 6, 2023. Translation; Xi Jin-
ping, “Accelerate the Construction of a Scientific and Technological Power to Achieve
High-Level Scientific and Technological Self-Reliance and Self Improvement” (习近平:
加快建设科技强国 实现高水平科技自立自强), Qiushi, April 30, 2022. Translation.
   2. Alan O. Sykes, “The Law and Economics of “Forced” Technology Transfer and
Its Implications for Trade and Investment Policy (and the U.S.–China Trade War),”
Journal of Legal Analysis 127 (2021).
   3. National Science and Technology Council, Critical and Emerging Technologies
List Update, February, 2024, 1; White House, Remarks by National Security Advisor
Jake Sullivan at the Special Competitive Studies Project Global Emerging Technolo-
gies Summit, September 16, 2022; White House, Statement from the Press Secretary
Regarding the National Strategy for Critical and Emerging Technologies, October
15, 2020; U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, Emerging
Technologies.
   4. White House, Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan at the Spe-
cial Competitive Studies Project Global Emerging Technologies Summit, September
16, 2022.
   5. Patricia Cohen, Keith Bradsher, and Jim Tankersley, “How China Pulled So Far
Ahead on Industrial Policy,” New York Times, May 27, 2024.
   6. Patricia Cohen, Keith Bradsher, and Jim Tankersley, “How China Pulled So Far
Ahead on Industrial Policy,” New York Times, May 27, 2024; Tai Ming Cheung et
al., “Planning for Innovation: Understanding China’s Plans for Technological, Energy,
Industrial, and Defense Development,” University of California Institute on Global
Conflict and Cooperation (prepared for the U.S.-China Security and Review Commis-
sion), July 28, 2016, xiii.
   7. Bloomberg, “China’s Economic Growth Comes in Worse than Expected, Adding
Pressure on Xi,” July 14, 2024; Sylvia Ma, “China’s Technology, Research Talent Pool
Large, but ‘Not Strong Enough,’ Lags behind US,” South China Morning Post, De-
cember 16, 2022.
   8. Alicia García-Herrero and Robin Schindowski, “China’s Quest for Innovation:
Progress and Bottlenecks,” China Horizons, June 21, 2023, 2; Jeffrey Ding, “The Dif-
fusion Deficit in Scientific and Technological Power: Re-Assessing China’s Rise,” Re-
view of International Political Economy 31:1 (March 2023): 174, 185.
   9. Tanner Greer and Nancy Yu, “Xi Believes China Can Win a Scientific Revolu-
tion,” Foreign Policy, April 30, 2024.
   10. Atomic Heritage Foundation, “Chinese Nuclear Program,” July 19, 2018.
   11. Emily Weinstein, “Beijing’s ‘Re-innovation’ Strategy Is Key Element of U.S.-Chi-
na Competition,” Brookings Institution, January 6, 2022.
   12. Emily Weinstein, “Beijing’s ‘Re-innovation’ Strategy Is Key Element of U.S.-Chi-
na Competition,” Brookings Institution, January 6, 2022.
   13. Ian Clay and Robert Atkinson, “Wake Up, America: China Is Overtaking the
United States in Innovation Output,” Information Technology and Innovation Foun-
dation, November 2022, 6.
   14. Ian Clay and Robert Atkinson, “Wake Up, America: China Is Overtaking the
United States in Innovation Output,” Information Technology and Innovation Foun-
dation, November 2022, 6.
   15. Karen M. Sutter, “ ‘Made in China 2025’ Industrial Policies: Issues for Con-
gress,” Congressional Research Service IF10964, March 10, 2023; Ian Clay and Robert
Atkinson, “Wake Up, America: China Is Overtaking the United States in Innovation
Output,” Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, November 2022, 8–9.
   16. Karen M. Sutter, “ ‘Made in China 2025’ Industrial Policies: Issues for Con-
gress,” Congressional Research Service IF10964, March 10, 2023; Ian Clay and Robert
Atkinson, “Wake Up, America: China Is Overtaking the United States in Innovation
Output,” Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, November 2022, 8–9.
   17. Zhang Tong and Dannie Peng, “Exclusive | Made in China 2025: China Meets
Most Targets in Manufacturing Plan, Proving US Tariffs and Sanctions Ineffective,”
South China Morning Post, April 30, 2024.
   18. Party History and Documentation Research Institute of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China, The Only Way to Build a World Power in Science
                                        237
and Technology (建设世界科技强国的必由之路), March 12, 2024. Translation. https://
web.archive.org/web/20240514010132/https:/www.dswxyjy.org.cn/n1/2024/0312/
c427152-40194506.html; National Committee of the Chinese People’s Political Con-
sultative Conference, Build a New Development Pattern and Promote Chinese-Style
Modernization - Excerpts from the Written Speech of the Second Meeting of the 14th
Standing Committee of the National Committee of the Chinese People’s Political Con-
sultative Conference (10) (构建新发展格局 推进中国式现代化——全国政协第十四届常
委会第二次会议大会书面发言摘登(十)), August 14, 2023. Translation; Wang Qin, “Im-
prove the New National System (Thinking Vertically and Horizontally)” (健全新型举
国体制(思想纵横)), People’s Daily, December 8, 2022. Translation; Xi Jinping, “Accel-
erate the Construction of a Scientific and Technological Power to Achieve High-Level
Scientific and Technological Self-Reliance and Self Improvement” (习近平:加快建设科
技强国 实现高水平科技自立自强), Qiushi, April 30, 2022. Translation; Xinhua, “The
Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and the State Council Issued
the Outline of the National Innovation-Driven Development Strategy,” (中共中央 国务
院印发《国家创新驱动发展战略纲要》), May 19, 2016. Translation.
   19. China’s National Development and Reform Commission, Accelerate the Mod-
ernization of the Industrial Chain in the New Era and New Journey (新时代新征
程上加快推动产业链现代化), October 27, 2023. Translation; Ben Murphy, “Choke-
points: China’s Self-Identified Strategic Technology Import Dependencies,” Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, May 2022, 1; Xi Jinping, “Accelerate the Con-
struction of a Scientific and Technological Power to Achieve High-Level Scientific
and Technological Self-reliance and Self Improvement” (习近平:加快建设科技强国 实
现高水平科技自立自强), Qiushi, April 30, 2022. Translation. https://web.archive.org/
web/20230930000903/https:/www.gov.cn/xinwen/2022-04/30/content_5688265.htm;
Xi Jinping, “Strive to Become a Major Scientific Center and Innovation Center in
the World” (努力成为世界主要科学中心和创新高地), QSTheory, March 15, 2021. Trans-
lation. https://web.archive.org/web/20240916175039/http://www.qstheory.cn/dukan/
qs/2021-03/15/c_1127209130.htm.
   20. Eduardo Baptista, “China to Restructure Sci-Tech Ministry to Achieve Self-Re-
liance Faster,” Reuters, March 7, 2023.
   21. Karen M. Sutter and Michael D. Sutherland, “China’s 14th Five-Year Plan: A
First Look,” Congressional Research Service IF11684, January 5, 2021.
   22. Karen M. Sutter and Michael D. Sutherland, “China’s 14th Five-Year Plan: A
First Look,” Congressional Research Service IF11684, January 5, 2021; Frank Tang,
“Explainer | What Is China’s Dual Circulation Economic Strategy and Why Is It
Important?” South China Morning Post, November 19, 2020.
   23. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Communique of the Third Plenary Ses-
sion of the 20th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, July 18, 2024.
https://web.archive.org/web/20240926152510/https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/eng/zy/
gb/202407/t2024071811456286.html; Economist, “China’s Ruling Party Sets Out Its
Vision of Economic Reform,” July 18, 2024; Arthur R. Kroeber, “Unleashing ‘New
Quality Productive Forces’: China’s Strategy for Technology-Led Growth,” Brookings
Institution, June 4, 2024.
   24. Arthur R. Kroeber, “Unleashing ‘New Quality Productive Forces’: China’s Strat-
egy for Technology-Led Growth,” Brookings Institution, June 4, 2024; Ministry of In-
dustry and Information Technology, “Implementation Opinion of the Ministry of In-
dustry and Information Technology and Seven Other Departments on Promoting the
Innovation and Development of Future Industries” (工业和信息化部等七部门关于推动
未来产业创新发展的实施意见), January 18, 2024. Translation. https://web.archive.org/
web/20240129104248/https://www.miit.gov.cn/zwgk/zcwj/wjfb/yj/art/2024/art_ad1
5b0f08a714fd8888c0e31468b8c54.html.
   25. Arthur R. Kroeber, “Unleashing ‘New Quality Productive Forces’: China’s Strat-
egy for Technology-Led Growth,” Brookings Institution, June 4, 2024; Jake Sullivan
and Hal Brands, “China Has Two Paths To Global Domination,” Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace. May 2020.
   26. Jeroen Groenewegen-Lau and Michael Laha, “Controlling the Innovation
Chain: China’s Strategy to Become a Science & Technology Superpower,” Mercator
Institute for China Studies, February 2, 2023, 2.
   27. Jeroen Groenewegen-Lau and Michael Laha, “Controlling the Innovation Chain:
China’s Strategy to Become a Science & Technology Superpower,” Mercator Institute
for China Studies, February 2, 2023, 2, 12; Anna B. Puglisi, written testimony for
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Chal-
lenges and Capabilities in Educating and Training the Next Generation Workforce,
February 24, 2023, 4; Alex Stone and Ma Xiu, “The PRC State & Defense Laboratory
System: An Overview,” China Aerospace Studies Institute, April 2022, 3.
                                        238
   28. Jeroen Groenewegen-Lau and Michael Laha, “Controlling the Innovation
Chain: China’s Strategy to Become a Science & Technology Superpower,” Mercator
Institute for China Studies, February 2, 2023, 12; Alex Stone and Ma Xiu, “The PRC
State & Defense Laboratory System: An Overview,” China Aerospace Studies Insti-
tute, April 2022, iv.
   29. Jeroen Groenewegen-Lau and Michael Laha, “Controlling the Innovation
Chain: China’s Strategy to Become a Science & Technology Superpower,” Mercator
Institute for China Studies, February 2, 2023, 4, 13.
   30. Ngor Luong, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Economic
and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 2; Jeroen Groenewegen-Lau
and Michael Laha, “Controlling the Innovation Chain: China’s Strategy to Become
a Science & Technology Superpower,” Mercator Institute for China Studies, February
2, 2023, 4; Xinhua, “The Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and
the State Council Issued the Outline of the National Innovation-Driven Development
Strategy” (中共中央 国务院印发《国家创新驱动发展战略纲要》), May 19, 2016. https://
web.archive.org/web/20240104110139/https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2016-05/19/
content_5074812.htm.
   31. Eduardo Baptista, “China to Restructure Sci-Tech Ministry to Achieve Self-Re-
liance Faster,” Reuters, March 7, 2023.
   32. Paul Mozur and Steven Lee Myers, “Xi’s Gambit: China Plans for a World with-
out American Technology,” New York Times, March 10, 2021.
   33. Francisco Moris and Alexander Rhodes, “Research and Development: U.S.
Trends and International Comparisons,” National Science Foundation, May 21, 2024,
21.
   34. Francisco Moris and Alexander Rhodes, “Research and Development: U.S.
Trends and International Comparisons,” National Science Foundation, May 21, 2024,
21
   35. Camille Boullenois, Agatha Kratz, and Laura Gormley, “Spread Thin: China’s
Science and Technology Spending in an Economic Slowdown,” Rhodium Group, De-
cember 15, 2023.
   36. Trelysa Long and Robert D. Atkinson, “Innovation Wars: How China Is Gaining
on the United States in Corporate R&D,” Information Technology and Innovation
Foundation, July 24, 2023.
   37. Trelysa Long and Robert D. Atkinson, “Innovation Wars: How China Is Gaining
on the United States in Corporate R&D,” Information Technology and Innovation
Foundation, July 24, 2023.
   38. Ngor Luong, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Economic
and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 2.
   39. Kevin Yao and Clarence Fernandez, “China Urges Giant State Firms to Be
Tech ‘Pillars’ in Self-Reliance Drive,” Reuters, May 10, 2023.
   40. Chan Ka Sing, “China Cashes in Banking Chips for Tech Drive,” Reuters, May
28, 2024.
   41. Chang Li et al., “Credit FAQ: What China’s Shifting Priorities May Mean for
Its Central SOEs,” S&P Global, March 18, 2024.
   42. Alexander Brown, “The Accelerator State: Small Firms Join the Fray of China’s
Techno-Industrial Drive,” Mercator Institute for China Studies, April 29, 2024; Kevin
Yao and Clarence Fernandez, “China Urges Giant State Firms to Be Tech ‘Pillars’ in
Self-Reliance Drive,” Reuters, May 10, 2023.
   43. Ngor Luong, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Economic
and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 4–5.
   44. Ngor Luong, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Economic
and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 2; Ngor Luong, Zachary Arnold,
and Ben Murphy, “Understanding Chinese Government Guidance Funds: An Analysis
of Chinese-Language Sources,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, March
2021, 2.
   45. Trivium China, “Tech-Industrial-Finance: The Incipient Remaking of China’s
Financial System,” August 4, 2023; Alexander Brown, François Chimits, and Gregor
Sebastian, “Accelerator State: How China Fosters ‘Little Giant’ Companies,” Mercator
Institute for China Studies, August 3, 2023, 3.
   46. Dan Wang, “China’s Hidden Tech Revolution,” Foreign Affairs, February 28,
2023; Economist, “How to Make It Big in Xi Jinping’s China,” April 24, 2023; Mark J.
Greeven, George S. Yip, and Wei Wei, “Understanding China’s Next Wave of Innova-
tion,” MIT Sloan Management Review, February 7, 2019.
                                          239
   47. Alexander Brown, François Chimits, and Gregor Sebastian, “Accelerator State:
How China Fosters ‘Little Giant’ Companies,” Mercator Institute for China Studies,
August 3, 2023, 4.
   48. Alexander Brown, François Chimits, and Gregor Sebastian, “Accelerator State:
How China Fosters ‘Little Giant’ Companies,” Mercator Institute for China Studies,
August 3, 2023, 3–4.
   49. Alexander Brown, François Chimits, and Gregor Sebastian, “Accelerator State:
How China Fosters ‘Little Giant’ Companies,” Mercator Institute for China Studies,
August 3, 2023, 2, 15.
   50. Alexander Brown, François Chimits, and Gregor Sebastian, “Accelerator State:
How China Fosters ‘Little Giant’ Companies,” Mercator Institute for China Studies,
August 3, 2023, 12.
   51. Henny Sender, “Why China’s Smaller Businesses Are Struggling to Access
Credit,” Financial Times, April 28, 2020.
   52. Alexander Brown, François Chimits, and Gregor Sebastian, “Accelerator State:
How China Fosters ‘Little Giant’ Companies,” Mercator Institute for China Studies,
August 3, 2023, 13.
   53. Ernst & Young, “How Does Shanghai’s STAR Market Support Innovation En-
terprises’ IPOs,” July 24, 2022; Samuel Shen and Julie Zhu, “STAR Market Tech
Board Offers Hope to Chinese Venture Capitalists,” Reuters, August 16, 2019.
   54. Zhang Shidong and Mia Castagnone, “China to Reform Shanghai’s Nas-
daq-Style Star Market, Improve Listing Quality: CSRC,” South China Morning Post,
June 19, 2024; Ernst & Young, “How Does Shanghai’s STAR Market Support Innova-
tion Enterprises’ IPOs,” July 24, 2022.
   55. CEIC database, “CN: Index: Shanghai Stock Exchange: Star 50”; Scott Kenne-
dy and Qin (Maya) Mei, “Two Years In, How Does the STAR Market Measure Up?”
Center for Strategic and International Studies, January 24, 2022.
   56. Quan Yue and Zhang Yukun, “China Tightens IPO Requirements for STAR
Market Hopefuls,” Caixin Global, May 3, 2024.
   57. Alexander Brown, François Chimits, and Gregor Sebastian, “Accelerator State:
How China Fosters ‘Little Giant’ Companies,” Mercator Institute for China Studies,
August 3, 2023, 12.
   58. Alexander Brown, François Chimits, and Gregor Sebastian, “Accelerator State:
How China Fosters ‘Little Giant’ Companies,” Mercator Institute for China Studies,
August 3, 2023, 13.
   59. People’s Bank of China, China Monetary Policy Report Q4 2021. Febru-
ary 11, 2022. http://www.pbc.gov.cn/en/3688229/3688353/3688356/4271098/45
15014/2022032411414559365.pdf; People’s Bank of China, China Monetary Poli-
cy Report Q2 2019, August 27, 2019. http://www.pbc.gov.cn/en/368822 9/36883
53/3688356/3830461/3881238/index.html; People’s Bank of China, China Mone-
tary Policy Report Q4 2018, February 21, 2019. http://www.pbc.gov.cn/en/resource/
cms/2019/03/2019032115562784220.pdf.
   60. People’s Bank of China, Statistical Report on the Credit Structure of Financial In-
stitutions (2023), January 26, 2024, 9. https://web.archive.org/web/20240610204321/
http://www.pbc.gov.cn/en/3688247/3688978/3709143/5227409/202401311704466379
3.pdf.
   61. Alexander Brown, François Chimits, and Gregor Sebastian, “Accelerator State:
How China Fosters ‘Little Giant’ Companies,” Mercator Institute for China Studies,
August 3, 2023, 3, 9.
   62. Alexander Brown, François Chimits, and Gregor Sebastian, “Accelerator State:
How China Fosters ‘Little Giant’ Companies,” Mercator Institute for China Studies,
August 3, 2023, 9.
   63. Alexander Brown, François Chimits, and Gregor Sebastian, “Accelerator State:
How China Fosters ‘Little Giant’ Companies,” Mercator Institute for China Studies,
August 3, 2023, 9.
   64. Fan Feifei, “Advancing New Industrialization, Modernization,” China Daily,
March 25, 2024; Xinhua, “Outline of the People’s Republic of China 14th Five-Year
Plan for National Economic and Social Development and Long-Range Objectives for
2035” (中华人民共和国国民经济和 社会发展第十四个五年规划和2035年远景目标 纲要),
May 13, 2021, 135. CSET Translation.
   65. Tanner Greer and Nancy Yu, “Xi Believes China Can Win a Scientific Revolu-
tion,” Foreign Policy, April 30, 2024; Dannie Peng, “China Wants to Win the Race in
Science and Tech. It May Not Work, Some Experts Warn,” South China Morning Post,
March 15, 2024; Xu Wei, “New Productive Forces Key to Growth, Xi Says,” China Dai-
ly, February 2, 2024; Xinhua, “Outline of the People’s Republic of China 14th Five-
Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development and Long-Range Objectives
                                          240
for 2035” (中华人民共和国国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和2035年远景目标纲要),
May 13, 2021, 135. Translation.
   66. Jared Cohen et al., “The Generative World Order: AI, Geopolitics, and Power,”
Goldman Sachs, December 14, 2023.
   67. IBM, “Understanding the Different Types of Artificial Intelligence,” October 12,
2023; National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, Artificial Intel-
ligence (AI).
   68. Q.ai, “Applications of Artificial Intelligence across Various Industries,” Forbes,
January 6, 2023; Google, “What Are AI Applications.”
   69. Paola Cecchi-Dimeglio, “5 Key Economic Impacts and Strategic Implications of
AI for Leaders,” Forbes, April 25, 2024.
   70. Michael Chui et al., “The Economic Potential of Generative AI,” McKinsey &
Company, June 24, 2023.
   71. Ma Ying, “Preliminary Understanding of Accelerating the Supply of New Qual-
ity Combat Capabilities” (对加快新质战斗力供给的初步认识), China Military Online,
May 2, 2024. Translation; Russell Hanson, Adam R. Grissom, and Christopher A.
Mouton, “The Future of Indo-Pacific Information Warfare: Challenges and Prospects
from the Rise of AI,” RAND Corporation, March 14, 2024, 2, 9; Darrell M. West and
John R. Allen, “How Artificial Intelligence Is Transforming the World,” Brookings
Institution, April 24, 2018; Michael Collat and Vincent Goldsmith, “How AI Can Help
Integrate Allies and Partners in the Indo-Pacific,” U.S. Naval Institute; Booz Allen
Hamilton, “AI-Powered Analytics for Indo-Pacific Wargaming.”
   72. Kai Fu Lee, “China’s Sputnik Moment and the Sino American Battle for AI
Supremacy,” Asia Society Policy Institute, December 3, 2019.
   73. Kai Fu Lee, “China’s Sputnik Moment and the Sino American Battle for AI
Supremacy,” Asia Society Policy Institute, December 3, 2019; China’s State Council,
New Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan, July 8, 2017. https://web.
archive.org/web/20240328181458/https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2017-07/20/
content_5211996.htm.
   74. Li Yuan, “Why China Didn’t Invent ChatGPT,” New York Times, February 17,
2023.
   75. Yanzi Xu and Daniel Castro, “What’s Next after the Two Sessions for AI in
China,” Center for Data Innovation, March 25, 2024; Ben Jiang, “ ‘Two Sessions’ 2024:
China’s Lawmakers Call for More AI Development to Catch Up with US, while Keep-
ing It under Regulatory Control,” South China Morning Post, March 11, 2024.
   76. Ngor Luong, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Economic
and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 1–5; Ryan Fedasiuk, Jennifer
Melot, and Ben Murphy, “Harnessed Lightning: Understanding and Using Artificial
Intelligence for Military Applications,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology,
October 2021, 32; Ngor Luong and Margarita Konaev, “In & Out of China: Financial
Support for AI Development,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, August
10, 2023.
   77. Boston Consulting Group, “The Race for Advanced AI Chips,” April 17, 2024.
   78. Stephen Ezell, “How Innovative Is China in Semiconductors?” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, August 19, 2024.
   79. Stephen Ezell, “How Innovative Is China in Semiconductors?” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, August 19, 2024.
   80. Kif Leswing, “NVIDIA Dominates the AI Chip Market, but There’s More Com-
petition than Ever,” CNBC, June 2, 2024; Lin Jones et al., “U.S. Exposure to the
Taiwanese Semiconductor Industry,” U.S. International Trade Commission, November
2023, 10.
   81. Mackenzie Hawkins, Cagan Koc, and Yuki Furukawa, “US Seeks Allies’ Help
in Curbing China’s AI Chip Progress,” Bloomberg, June 19, 2024; White House, FACT
SHEET: President Biden Takes Action to Protect American Workers and Businesses
from China’s Unfair Trade Practices, May 14, 2024; Yuki Furukawa, “Japan Tightens
Export Controls on More Chip and Quantum Tech,” Bloomberg, April 26, 2024; Toby
Sterling, “Dutch Set to Comply with U.S. Demands on China Exports,” Reuters, April
7, 2024; Gregory C. Allen, Emily Benson, and Margot Putnam, “Japan and the Neth-
erlands Announce Plans for New Export Controls on Semiconductor Equipment,”
Center for Strategic and International Studies, April 10, 2023; U.S. Department of
Commerce, Commerce Implements New Export Controls on Advanced Computing and
Semiconductor Manufacturing Items to the People’s Republic of China (PRC), October
7, 2022.
   82. Mackenzie Hawkins, Cagan Koc, and Yuki Furukawa, “US Seeks Allies’ Help
in Curbing China’s AI Chip Progress,” Bloomberg, June 19, 2024; White House, FACT
SHEET: President Biden Takes Action to Protect American Workers and Businesses
                                        241
from China’s Unfair Trade Practices, May 14, 2024; Yuki Furukawa, “Japan Tightens
Export Controls on More Chip and Quantum Tech,” Bloomberg, April 26, 2024; Toby
Sterling, “Dutch Set to Comply with U.S. Demands on China Exports,” Reuters, April
7, 2024; Gregory C. Allen, Emily Benson, and Margot Putnam, “Japan and the Neth-
erlands Announce Plans for New Export Controls on Semiconductor Equipment,”
Center for Strategic and International Studies, April 10, 2023; U.S. Department of
Commerce, Commerce Implements New Export Controls on Advanced Computing and
Semiconductor Manufacturing Items to the People’s Republic of China (PRC), October
7, 2022.
   83. White House, FACT SHEET: CHIPS and Science Act Will Lower Costs, Create
Jobs, Strengthen Supply Chains, and Counter China, August 9, 2022.
   84. Yoko Kubota, “The Goal for China’s Chip Giant: Cut Out the U.S.,” Wall Street
Journal, June 3, 2024.
   85. Economist Intelligence Unit, “China Boosts State-Led Chip Investment,” March
13, 2024.
   86. Fanny Potkin, “Exclusive: Chinese AI Chip Firms Downgrading Designs to
Secure TSMC Production,” Reuters, June 4, 2024; Yuan Gao, “China Creates $47.5
Billion Chip Fund to Back Nation’s Firms,” Bloomberg, May 27, 2024; Liza Lin, “Chi-
na Raises $48 Billion for Semiconductor Fund to Bolster Chip-Making Capabilities,”
Wall Street Journal, May 27, 2024; Reuters, “China Sets Up Third Fund with $47.5
Bln to Boost Semiconductor Sector,” May 27, 2024.
   87. Iris Deng, “Shenzhen’s Central Business District Offers Chip-Making Incen-
tives, with Millions in Subsidies for New Projects,” South China Morning Post, June
7, 2023; Global Times, “Chinese Cities Strengthen Deployment for Local Development
of Chip and Related Industries,” April 25, 2023. https://archive.fo/bnpQi; Zhou Fang,
“Chinese Cities Back Compound Semiconductor Industry as Demand Grows,” Yic-
ai Global, April 25, 2023. https://www.yicaiglobal.com/news/20230425-04-chinese-
cities-support-development-of-compound-semiconductor-industry-as-demand-grows;
Ann Cao, “Tech War: Southwestern Tech Hub Chengdu Offers Us$72 Million in
Subsidies to Local Semiconductor Projects amid China’s Chip Self-sufficiency Drive,”
South China Morning Post, March 10, 2023; Ann Cao,“China Gave 190 Chip Firms
US $1.75 Billion in Subsidies in 2022 as It Seeks Semiconductor Self-sufficiency,”
South China Morning Post, March 10, 2023; Arrian Ebrahimi and Jiong Feng, “Chip
Subsidy Flows—Comparing China and the U.S,” Chip Capitols, February 28, 2023.
   88. Reuters, “Beijing City to Subsidise Domestic AI Chips, Targets Self-Reliance by
2027,” April 25, 2024.
   89. Reuters, “Beijing City to Subsidise Domestic AI Chips, Targets Self-Reliance by
2027,” April 25, 2024.
   90. Wayne Williams, “Huawei Claims Its AI Chip Is Faster than Nvidia A100—but
Chinese Powerhouse Struggles to Match Transformational Pace of Rivals as Interna-
tional Sanctions Force Change in Design,” TechRadar, July 1, 2024.
   91. Josh Ye, “How Huawei Plans to Rival NVIDIA in the AI Chip Business,” Reu-
ters, November 7, 2023.
   92. Jacob Feldgoise and Hanna Dohmen, “Pushing the Limits: Huawei’s AI Chip
Tests U.S. Export Controls,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, June 17,
2024.
   93. Liza Lin and Raffaele Huang, “Huawei Readies New Chip to Challenge NVID-
IA, Surmounting U.S. Sanctions,” Wall Street Journal, August 13, 2024.
   94. Liza Lin and Raffaele Huang, “Huawei Readies New Chip to Challenge NVID-
IA, Surmounting U.S. Sanctions,” Wall Street Journal, August 13, 2024.
   95. Jeff Pao, “Low Yield for SMIC-Huawei NVIDIA Knockoff? So What?” Asia
Times, June 29, 2024; Jeff Pao, “SMIC to Sell Huawei Costly, Inefficient 5nm Chips,”
Asia Times, February 8, 2024.
   96. Hasan Chowdhury, “Cuda Is Nvidia’s Secret Sauce—and Now It’s in the Sights
of European Regulators,” Business Insider, July 2, 2024; Tim Bradshaw, “NVIDIA’s
Rivals Take Aim at Its Software Dominance,” Financial Times, May 21, 2024; James
Wang, “CUDA Is Still a Giant Moat for NVIDIA,” Weighty Thoughts, March 23, 2024;
Pritam Bordoloi, “Why Intel Closing the Gap with NVIDIA Is Good News,” AIM,
September 20, 2023; Kevin Jackson and Doug Eadline, “Spelunking the HPC and AI
GPU Software Stacks,” HPC Wire, June 21, 2024; Deep Lizard, “CUDA Explained -
Why Deep Learning Uses GPUs”.
   97. Kevin Jackson and Doug Eadline, “Spelunking the HPC and AI GPU Software
Stacks,” HPC Wire, June 21, 2024; Air Street Capital, Nathan Benaich, and Alex
Chalmers, “Chips All the Way Down,” Air Street Press, May 30, 2024; Stephen Witt,
“How Jensen Huang’s NVIDIA Is Powering the A.I. Revolution,” New Yorker, Novem-
ber 27, 2023.
                                       242
   98. Michael Cusumano, “NVIDIA at the Center of the Generative AI Ecosystem—
for Now,” Communications of the ACM, January 8, 2024; Steve Hsu and TP Huang,
“Huawei and the US-China Chip War—#44”, Manifold1, September 21, 2023; Jaryd
Hermann, “How NVIDIA Grows: The Engine for AI and the Catalyst of the Future,”
How They Grow, September 7, 2023.
   99. Huawei, “Revolutionizing AI with Huawei’s Ascend: A Comprehensive Over-
view,” August 26, 2023; Pandaily, “Chinese Academy of Sciences Unveils Next-Gen-
eration AI Model ‘Zidong Taichu 2.0,’ ” June 16, 2023; Steven J. Vaughan-Nichols,
“ChatGPT, How Did You Get Here? It Was a Long Journey through Open Source AI,”
Register, March 24, 2023; Andrey Bout et al., “PanGu-Σ: Towards Trillion Parame-
ter Language Model with Sparse Heterogeneous Computing,” Arxiv, March 20, 2023;
PyTorch, “PyTorch at Tesla - Andrej Karpathy, Tesla,” YouTube, November 6, 2019;
MindSpore, “AI Industrial Flow Simulation Model——DongFang·YuFeng,” https://
archive.ph/ybrox’; NVIDIA,“Generative AI for Developers”; Huawei, “Revolutionizing
AI with Huawei’s Ascend: A Comprehensive Overview.”
   100. Jaryd Hermann, “How NVIDIA Grows: The Engine for AI and the Catalyst
of the Future,” How They Grow, September 7, 2023; Huawei, “Huawei Releases AI
Strategy and Full-Stack, All-Scenario AI Portfolio,” October 10, 2018.
   101. Huawei, “Huawei Releases AI Strategy and Full-Stack, All-Scenario AI Port-
folio,” October 10, 2018.
   102. Steven J. Vaughan-Nichols, “ChatGPT, How Did You Get Here? It Was a Long
Journey through Open Source AI,” Register, March 24, 2023; Huawei, “MindSpore:
Huawei’s All-Scenario AI Computing Framework Now Open Source,” April 22, 2020;
PyTorch, “PyTorch at Tesla - Andrej Karpathy, Tesla,” YouTube, November 6, 2019.
   103. Kendra Schaefer and Paul Triolo, “China’s Generative AI Ecosystem in 2024:
Rising Investment and Expectations,” National Bureau of Asian Research, June 27,
2024; Kevin Jackson and Doug Eadline, “Spelunking the HPC and AI GPU Software
Stacks,” HPC Wire, June 21, 2024; Jacob Feldgoise and Hanna Dohmen, “Pushing the
Limits: Huawei’s AI Chip Tests U.S. Export Controls,” Center for Security and Emerg-
ing Technology, June 17, 2024; Sasirekha Subramanian, “NVIDIA vs. AMD vs. Intel:
Which AI Stock Is Best as Competition Heats Up?” Forbes, June 12, 2024; Air Street
Capital, Nathan Benaich, and Alex Chalmers, “Chips All the Way Down,” Air Street
Press, May 30, 2024; Xiaofen Qiu, “Forefront丨Huawei Releases Ascend AI Comput-
ing Cluster, Meng Wanzhou Says It Proposes Comprehensive Intelligence Strategy” (
最前线丨华为发布昇腾AI计算集群，孟晚舟称提出全面智能化战略), 36Kr, September 20,
2023. Translation; 1kg, “Nvidia’s CUDA Monopoly,” August 7, 2023; Minghe Hu and
Zen Soo, “China’s Reliance on US-Origin Platforms for Deep Learning Raises Ques-
tions about Country’s AI Push,” South China Morning Post, November 22, 2019.
   104. NVIDIA, “Pretrained AI Models”; Max A.Cherney, “Exclusive: Behind the Plot
to Break NVIDIA’s Grip on AI by Targeting Software,” Reuters, March 25, 2024.
   105. Eleanor Olcott, Ryan McMorrow, and Tina Hui, “Huawei’s Bug-Ridden Soft-
ware Hampers China’s Efforts to Replace NVIDIA in AI,” Financial Times, Septem-
ber 3, 2024; Chu Daye and Zhang Weilan, “NVIDIA’s Reported Trouble Indication
of Recklessness of US Govt’s Crackdown on China,” Global Times, January 8, 2024.
   106. Kate Kaye, “Will Nationalism End the Golden Age of Global AI Collaboration,”
RedTail Media, June 14, 2024; Jeffery Ding, “Feature Translation: AI Frameworks
Development White Paper,” ChinAI Substack, March 7, 2022.
   107. Gregory C. Allen, “In Chip Race, China Gives Huawei the Steering Wheel:
Huawei’s New Smartphone and the Future of Semiconductor Export Controls,” Cen-
ter for Strategic and International Studies, October 6, 2023.
   108. Eleanor Olcott, Ryan McMorrow, and Tina Hui, “Huawei’s Bug-Ridden Soft-
ware Hampers China’s Efforts to Replace NVIDIA in AI,” Financial Times, Septem-
ber 3, 2024; Kimberley Kao and Raffaele Huang, “Chips or Not, Chinese AI Pushes
Ahead,” Wall Street Journal, August 23, 2024; Tony Peng, “Huawei Claims AI Chips
Surpass NVIDIA’s A100, Chinese AI Apps Break into the US, and Tesla FSD Inten-
sifies China’s ADAS Competition,” Recode China AI, June 24, 2024; Data Ape, “Is
It Harder for Huawei CANN to Replace Nvidia CUDA than for Hongmeng to Re-
place Android?” (华为CANN要替代英伟达CUDA，比鸿蒙替代安卓还难么),” Sohu, June
14, 2024. Translation. https://archive.fo/SJy3Y; Dava_ Xu, “What Is Ascend CANN?”
Huawei, November 29, 2022.
   109. C. Scott Brown, “The HUAWEI Ban Explained: A Complete Timeline and Ev-
erything You Need to Know,” Android Authority, April 4, 2024; Natalie Weinstein,
“Google Cuts Off Huawei Phones from Future Android Updates,” CNET, May 20,
2019.
   110. Jessica Dolcourt, “Huawei Could Survive without Android, but It Wouldn’t Be
Pretty,” CNET, May 25, 2019; Andrew Williams, “What Google’s Huawei Ban Means
for Millions of Android Users,” Wired, May 20, 2019.
                                       243
   111. Ron Amadeo, “Huawei’s HarmonyOS: ‘Fake It Till You Make It’ Meets OS
Development,” arsTECHNICA, February 2, 2021; Kamal Munir and Hamza Mudassir,
“Four Reasons Huawei’s New Harmony OS Won’t Solve Its Problems,” The Conver-
sation, August 19, 2019.
   112. Diksha Madhok and Joyce Jiang, “Huawei Isn’t Just Back from the Dead. It’s
a Force to Be Reckoned With,” CNN, June 24, 2024; Megan Hogan, “Export Controls
Are Only a Short-Term Solution to China’s Chip Progress,” War on the Rocks, De-
cember 22, 2023.
   113. Iris Deng, “Tech War: Huawei Sees HarmonyOS Breaking the Dominance
of Android and Apple’s iOS in China,” South China Morning Post, June 21, 2024;
Gangandeep Kaur, “Huawei Intensifies Development of HarmonyOS App Ecosystem,”
Fierce Network, April 22, 2024.
   114. Xinmei Shen, “Huawei to Roll Out Home-Grown Mobile Operating System
in Challenge to Apple’s Ios, Android,” South China Morning Post, October 7, 2024;
Wayne Williams, “Huawei Succeeds Where Microsoft Failed Miserably—Harmonyos
Now on Almost One Billion Devices, and China’s Largest Mobile Phone Manufacturer
Has Completely Eliminated Android,” TechRadar, July 1, 2024; Diksha Madhok and
Joyce Jiang, “Huawei Isn’t Just Back from the Dead. It’s a Force to Be Reckoned
With,” CNN, June 24, 2024; Zhang Erchi and Denise Jia, “Huawei’s Latest Operating
System Completely Breaks with Android,” Caixin Global, January 19, 2024.
   115. Jimmy Goodrich, “China’s Evolving Semiconductor Strategy,” UC Institute on
Global Conflict and Cooperation, May 29, 2024.
   116. Reva Goujon, Jan-Peter Kleinhans, and Laura Gormley, “Thin Ice: US Path-
ways to Regulating China-Sourced Legacy Chips,” Rhodium Group, May 13, 2024.
   117. Jimmy Goodrich, “China’s Evolving Semiconductor Strategy,” UC Institute on
Global Conflict and Cooperation, May 29, 2024.
   118. Stephen Ezell, “How Innovative Is China in Semiconductors?” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, August 19, 2024.
   119. Andrew David et al., “Foundational Fabs: China’s Use of Nonmarket Policies
to Expand Its Role in the Semiconductor Supply Chain,” Silverado Policy Accelerator,
October 2023, 4, 19.
   120. Andrew David and Sarah Stewart, “China Semiconductor Manufacturing
Equipment Import Analysis: 2023 Imports Grow amid Build Out of Foundational
Fabs,” Silverado Policy Accelerator, March 2024, 5.
   121. TrendForce, “China’s Import of Chip Making Equipment Hit New High This
Year, with Mature Nodes Driving the Demand,” August 26, 2024.
   122. Che Pan, “Tech War: China Advances in Chip Tool Self-Sufficiency but Li-
thography Still a ‘Choke Point,’ ” South China Morning Post, August 7, 2024; Jowi
Morales, “China Only Produces 1% of Critical Litho Chipmaking Tools, Exposing It
to Harsh US Sanctions—Investment in Domestic Toolmakers Looks to Reverse the
Trend,” Tom’s Hardware, June 14, 2024.
   123. Jingyue Hsaio, “China Imports over 400 Lithography Machines from the
Netherlands in Past Five Years,” DigiTimes Asia, January 25, 2024.
   124. Laura Dobberstein, “Banned US Chipmaking Equipment Still Ending Up in
China, Says Report,” Register, November 15, 2023; U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, 2023 Annual Report to Congress, November 2023.
   125. Jimmy Goodrich, “China’s Evolving Semiconductor Strategy,” UC Institute on
Global Conflict and Cooperation, May 29, 2024.
   126. Antonia Hmaidi, “China’s Long-Term Struggle to Become Integral in Semicon-
ductor Supply Chains,” Mercator Institute for China Studies, March 4, 2024; Arjun
Kharpal, “China May be Making More Advanced Chips despite U.S. Sanctions—But
It Still Faces Big Problems,” CNBC, February 11, 2024
   127. Matt Brazil and Peter W. Singer, “Size Isn’t Everything: China’s New Chip
is Less Earthshaking than You May Have Heard,” Defense One, November 9, 2023.
   128. Reva Goujon, Jan-Peter Kleinhans, and Laura Gormley, “Thin Ice: US Path-
ways to Regulating China-Sourced Legacy Chips,” Rhodium Group, May 13, 2024.
   129. Reva Goujon, Jan-Peter Kleinhans, and Laura Gormley, “Thin Ice: US Path-
ways to Regulating China-Sourced Legacy Chips,” Rhodium Group, May 13, 2024.
   130. Reva Goujon, Jan-Peter Kleinhans, and Laura Gormley, “Thin Ice: US Path-
ways to Regulating China-Sourced Legacy Chips,” Rhodium Group, May 13, 2024;
Andrew David et al., “Foundational Fabs: China’s Use of Nonmarket Policies to Ex-
pand Its Role in the Semiconductor Supply Chain,” Silverado Policy Accelerator, Oc-
tober 2023, 4, 19; Aaron Klotz, “US Sanctions Transform China into Legacy Chip
Production Juggernaut—Production Jumped 40% in Q1 2024,” Tom’s Hardware, April
17, 2024.
   131. Reva Goujon, Jan-Peter Kleinhans, and Laura Gormley, “Thin Ice: US Path-
ways to Regulating China-Sourced Legacy Chips,” Rhodium Group, May 13, 2024.
                                       244
   132. Aaron Krolik and Paul Mozer, “The Illicit Flow of Technology to Russia Goes
through This Hong Kong Address,” New York Times, July 25, 2024.
   133. Reva Goujon, Jan-Peter Kleinhans, and Laura Gormley, “Thin Ice: US Path-
ways to Regulating China-Sourced Legacy Chips,” Rhodium Group, May 13, 2024.
   134. Reva Goujon, Jan-Peter Kleinhans, and Laura Gormley, “Thin Ice: US Path-
ways to Regulating China-Sourced Legacy Chips,” Rhodium Group, May 13, 2024.
   135. Jimmy Goodrich, “China’s Evolving Semiconductor Strategy,” UC Institute on
Global Conflict and Cooperation, May 29, 2024.
   136. Reva Goujon, Jan-Peter Kleinhans, and Laura Gormley, “Thin Ice: US Path-
ways to Regulating China-Sourced Legacy Chips,” Rhodium Group, May 13, 2024.
   137. McKinsey and Company, “Generative AI: The Next S-Curve for the Semicon-
ductor Industry?” March 29, 2024.
   138. Paul Triolo and Kendra Schaefer, China’s Generative AI Ecosystem in 2024:
Rising Investment and Expectations,” National Bureau of Asian Research, June 27,
2024; Girish Sastry et al., “Computing Power and the Governance of Artificial Intel-
ligence,” arXiv, February 14, 2024; Jai Vipra and Sarah Myers West, “Computational
Power and AI,” AI Now Institute, September 27, 2023.
   139. Paul Triolo and Kendra Schaefer, “China’s Generative AI Ecosystem in 2024:
Rising Investment and Expectations,” National Bureau of Asian Research, June 27,
2024.
   140. Paul Triolo and Kendra Schaefer, “China’s Generative AI Ecosystem in 2024:
Rising Investment and Expectations,” National Bureau of Asian Research, June 27,
2024.
   141. Paul Triolo and Kendra Schaefer, “China’s Generative AI Ecosystem in 2024:
Rising Investment and Expectations,” National Bureau of Asian Research, June 27,
2024.
   142. Paul Triolo and Kendra Schaefer, “China’s Generative AI Ecosystem in 2024:
Rising Investment and Expectations,” National Bureau of Asian Research, June 27,
2024.
   143. Paul Triolo and Kendra Schaefer, “China’s Generative AI Ecosystem in 2024:
Rising Investment and Expectations,” National Bureau of Asian Research, June 27,
2024.
   144. Rebecca Arcesati, “China’s AI Development Model in an Era of Technological
Deglobalization,” Mercator Institute for China Studies, May 2, 2024; Jane Cai, “Chi-
na’s New Data Agency Plans Fast Track to Powerful National Computing Network,”
South China Morning Post, April 3, 2024; Xinhua, “China Empowers Green, Digital
Future with Mega Data Project,” February 22, 2022.
   145. China Daily, “Computing Power Infrastructure Key to Digital Economy,” Octo-
ber 12, 2023; Global Times, “China Aims to Increase Computing Power by More than
50% by 2025,” October 9, 2023.
   146. Josh Ye, “China Targets 50% Growth in Computing Power in Race against
U.S.,” Reuters, October 9, 2023.
   147. China Daily, “Action Plan to Improve Technology Standards,” May 30, 2024;
Sylvie Zhuang, “China Plans Leading Role in Global AI Race on Standards and Com-
puting Power Push,” South China Morning Post, May 30, 2024.
   148. David McCabe, “China’s Cloud Computing Firms Raise Concern for U.S.,” New
York Times, June 21, 2023.
   149. IDC, “Worldwide Spending on Public Cloud Services Is Forecast to Double
between 2024 and 2028, According to New IDC Spending Guide,” July 29, 2024.
   150. Dan Robinson, “When It Comes to Cloud, It’s China against the World,” Reg-
ister, August 21, 2024.
   151. Canalys, “Mainland China’s cloud service spend grew by 20% in Q1 2024—
Canalys,” June 27, 2024.
   152. Dan Robinson, “When It Comes to Cloud, It’s China against the World,” Reg-
ister, August 21, 2024; Clark Robert, “China’s Cloud Market to Triple by 2027, Says
Govt Think-Tank,” Light Reading, August 2, 2024.
   153. Dan Robinson, “When It Comes to Cloud, It’s China against the World,” Reg-
ister, August 21, 2024; Fan Feifei, AWS Will Step Up Long-Term Play in Nation,
Exec Says,” China Daily, June 6, 2024. https://web.archive.org/web/20240721071904/
https:/www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202406/06/WS66610fcaa31082fc043cb2b4.html.
   154. Fan Feifei, “AWS Will Step Up Long-Term Play in Nation, Exec Says,” China
Daily, June 6, 2024.
   155. Mark Haranas, “Cloud Market Share in Q2: Microsoft Drops, Google Gains,
AWS Remains Leader,” CRN, August 7, 2024; Canalys, “Mainland China’s Cloud Ser-
vice Spending to Grow by 18% in 2024,” March 28, 2024.
   156. Huawei Cloud, “Global Layout”; Alibaba Cloud, “Regions and Zones,” August
29, 2024; Tencent Cloud, “Tencent Cloud Global Infrastructure.”
                                        245
   157. Huawei Cloud, “Global Layout”; Alibaba Cloud, “Regions and Zones,” August
29, 2024; Tencent Cloud, “Tencent Cloud Global Infrastructure.”
   158. Gagandeep Kaur, “Southeast Asia Emerging as the New Battleground for
Cloud Service Providers,” Fierce Network, May 16, 2024; Tsubasa Suriga and Akito
Tanaka, “Southeast Asia’s Digital Battle: Chinese and U.S. Big Tech Face Off over
$1tn Market,” Nikkei Asia, November 15, 2023.
   159. Alibaba Cloud, “Going Global | How Far Can Chinese Cloud Service Reach?”
Alibaba Cloud Community, September 13, 2024; EqualOcean, “How Far Can a Chi-
nese “Smart Cloud” Go?” (一朵中国 “智能云”, 能飘多远), September 6, 2024. Transla-
tion. https://web.archive.org/web/20240924151452/https://cn.equalocean.com/analys
is/202409061041971?spm=a2c65.11461447.0.0.486412b9v1L4eh.
   160. Kevin Xu, “US vs China: A Cloud Proxy War,” Interconnected, July 3, 2023;
Google, “Cloud Locations”; Microsoft, “Microsoft Datacenters”.
   161. Saheli Roy Choudhury, “As Information Increasingly Drives Economies, China
Is Set to Overtake the US in Race for Data,” CNBC, February 13, 2019.
   162. Zac Haluza, “What Is China’s ‘National Cloud’?” Root Access, August 10, 2022.
   163. Andrew Stokols, “How Is China’s ‘Eastern Data Western Compute’ (东数西算)
Developing?” Sinocities, May 28, 2024.
   164. Robert Clark, “Cloud News: China Unveils National Cloud, Telstra Commits
to Azure,” Light Reading, July 26, 2022.
   165. Trivium Tech, “Tianjin’s on Cloud (Computing) Nine,” May 31, 2023; Tracy
Qu, “Alibaba’s Cloud Services Unit Expands Business with China’s Data Exchanges
under Major New Deal in Southern Tech Hub Shenzhen,” April 24, 2023.
   166. Jeremy Hsu, “Electricity Demand from Data Centres Set to Double by 2026,”
New Scientist, January 24, 2024; Blue Ocean Technology, “Accelerate the ‘Green
Transformation’ of Data Centers to Enable Low-Carbon Development of the Dig-
ital Economy” (加速数据中心 “绿色转型” 赋能数字经济低碳发展), October 18, 2023.
Translation. https://web.archive.org/web/20240806212618/https%3A%2F%2Fwww.
blueocean-china.net%2Ffaq3%2F926.html.
   167. People’s Daily, “China Has Created Three Batches of 153 National Green Data
Centers, ‘Turn Green’ and Energy Consumption ‘Slims Down’ ” (我国已创建三批共计
153家国家绿色数据中心 数据中心 “变绿” 能源消耗 “瘦身,”), May 6, 2022. Translation;
Jiang Hongqiang, Li Bo, and Zhang Wei, “Promoting Green and Low-Carbon Devel-
opment of Data Centers” (推动数据中心绿色低碳发展), China Environment News, Feb-
ruary 2, 2022. https://web.archive.org/web/20240918150104/http://www.ce.cn/cysc/
stwm/gd/202202/10/t20220210_37319445.shtml.
   168. John Kemp, “China’s Rapid Renewables Rollout Hits Grid Limits,” Reuters,
July 4, 2024; China Electric Power Knowledgebase, “Ranking of GDP and Electricity
Consumption Growth Rates of Provinces in China in 2023” (中国电力知库, “2023年
全国各省GDP和用电量增速排行), February 27, 2024. Translation. https://web.archive.
org/web/20240918175112/https://m.bjx.com.cn/mnews/20240207/1360866.shtml;
Amy Hawkins, “China Ramps Up Coal Power despite Carbon Neutral Pledges,”
Guardian, April 23, 2023; Xiaoying You, “Explainer: Why China’s Provinces Are So
Important for Action on Climate Change,” CarbonBrief, October 10, 2022; Ye Ruolin
and Yuan Ye, “Untangling the Crossed Wires of China’s ‘Super Grid,’ ” Dialogue Earth,
March 29, 2021; Debin Fang et al., “The Impacts of Electricity Consumption in Chi-
na’s Key Economic Regions,” Applied Energy, June 1, 2020.
   169. Colleen Howe, “Explainer: The Numbers behind China’s Renewable Energy
Boom,” Reuters, November 15, 2023; Yue Qiu et al., “Analysis of China’s Electricity
Price and Electricity Burden of Basic Industries under the Carbon Peak Target be-
fore 2030,” CSEE Journal of Power and Energy Systems (March 2024); Guo Yingzhe,
“China Unveils Vast Plan to Build Regional Data Center Clusters,” Caixin Global,
February 18, 2022.
   170. Zhang Erchi and Chen Min, “Five Things to Know about China’s Mega East-
West Data Center Plan,” Nikkei Asia, April 21, 2022; Lightcone Intelligence, “The
‘East Data West Computing’ Project Has Been Launched” (东数西算”工程启动，一文
看懂云计算巨头数据中心布局), Pingwest, March 2, 2022. Translation.
   171. China National Development and Reform Commission et al., Implementation
Opinions on Deeply Implementing the “Eastern Data and Western Computing” Project
to Accelerate the Construction of a National Integrated Computing Network (国家发
展改革委等部门关于深入实施“东数西算”工程加快构建全国一体化算力网的实施意见),
December 29, 2023. Translation. https://archive.ph/CD833.
   172. Liu Liehong, “Liu Liehong, Accelerate the Construction of a National Inte-
grated Computing Network and Promote the Construction of a Chinese-Style Mod-
ern Digital Foundation” (刘烈宏,加快构建全国一体化算力网 推动建设中国式现代化数字
基座), Qiushi, June 2024. Translation. https://web.archive.org/web/20240919173604/
http://www.qstheory.cn/dukan/qs/2024-03/16/c_1130089697.htm;          Dannie    Peng,
                                       246
“China Is Spending Billions on a National Computing Network. Its Data Chief Says
Why,” South China Morning Post, March 17, 2024; Caijing Eleven, “The National
Integrated Computing Network Policy Has Been Finalized, Which Has Three Di-
rect Impacts on Computing Power Companies” (吴俊宇,” “全国一体化算力网政策落
定，对算力企业有三大直接影响), 36kr, December 29, 2023. Translation; NDRC, “The
National Development And Reform Commission And Other Departments Issued
Opinions On Deepening The Implementation Of The ‘Eastern Data And Western
Computing’ Project And Accelerating The Construction Of A National Integrated
Computing Network” (数据局, 关于深入实施“东数西算”工程加快构建全国一体化算
力网的实施意见(发改数据 (2023) 1779号), December 29, 2023. Translation. https://
web.archive.org/web/20240919173701/https://www.ndrc.gov.cn/xxgk/zcfb/tz/202312/
t20231229_1363000.html.
   173. Liu Liehong, “Developing an Integrated National Computing Network,” Qi-
ushi English, July 8, 2024. Translation; Dannie Peng, “China Is Spending Billions
on a National Computing Network. Its Data Chief Says Why,” South China Morning
Post, March 17, 2024.
   174. Global Times, “China Vows to Establish Integrated Computing Power Net-
work, Boosting Digital Economy: NDB Chief,” March 25, 2024.
   175. China Daily, “2024 Big Data Expo ‘Integration of Digital and Comput-
ing, Driving the Future’ Exchange Event Was Held in Guiyang” (2024数博会“数
算一体，驱动未来”交流活动在贵阳举办), September 2, 2024. Translation. https://
web.archive.org/web/20240919225040/https://cn.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202409/02/
WS66d545d7a310a792b3ab9cf8.html; Che Pan, “China Invests US$6.1 Billion in
Data Centre Infrastructure amid Surge in Demand for AI Chips,” South China Morn-
ing Post, August 29, 2024; Andrew Stokols, “How is China’s ‘Eastern Data Western
Compute’ (东数西算) Developing?” Sinocities, May 28, 2024.
   176. Andrew Stokols, “How is China’s ‘Eastern Data Western Compute’ (东数西算)
Developing?” Sinocities, May 28, 2024.
   177. Andrew Stokols, “How is China’s ‘Eastern Data Western Compute’ (东数西算)
Developing?” Sinocities, May 28, 2024.
   178. Xinhua, “The Thirst for Computing Power, Guian’s Solution” (算力之渴贵安之
解), June 17, 2024. Translation; Zhang Zitong, “Supply and Demand Mismatch, Dupli-
cate Construction, Domestic Computing Centers Explore Intelligent Upgrades” (供需
错配、重复建设，国内算力中心探路智能化升级), 21st Century Economy, May 10, 2024.
Translation; Caijing, “China’s Computing Power, Ambition and Weakness” (中国算
力，雄心与软肋｜《财经》封面), May 5, 2023. Translation. https://archive.fo/PYPh5;
Huang Xin, “There Are Several Hurdles for ‘Eastern Data’ to Achieve ‘Western Com-
puting’ ” (东数实现西算要迈几道坎), Economics Daily, April 21, 2024. Translation; Xin-
hua, “Outlook | ‘Counting in the East and Calculating in the West’ Blocking Perspec-
tive” (東數西算”堵點透視), January 15, 2024. Translation. https://archive.ph/zrveK.
   179. White House, Readout of White House Roundtable on U.S. Leadership in AI
Infrastructure, September 12, 2024.
   180. Wall Street Journal, “U.S. Looks to Restrict China’s Access to Cloud Comput-
ing to Protect Advanced Technology,” July 4, 2023; Hanna Dohmen et al., “Controlling
Access to Advanced Compute via the Cloud: Options for U.S. Policymakers, Part I”
and “Part 2,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, May 15, 2023.
   181. Eleanor Olcott, Qianer Liu, and Demetri Sevastopulo, “Chinese AI Groups Use
Cloud Services to Evade US Chip Export Controls,” Financial Times, March 8, 2023.
   182. Eleanor Olcott, Qianer Liu, and Demetri Sevastopulo, “Chinese AI Groups Use
Cloud Services to Evade US Chip Export Controls,” Financial Times, March 8, 2023.
   183. Eduardo Baptista, Fanny Potkin, and Karen Freifeld, “Chinese Entities Turn
to Amazon Cloud and Its Rivals to Access High-End US Chips, AI,” Reuters, August
23, 2024.
   184. Raffaelle Huang, “Chinese AI Researchers Are Secretly Accessing Banned
NVIDIA Chips,” Wall Street Journal, August 26, 2024.
   185. Raffaelle Huang, “Chinese AI Researchers Are Secretly Accessing Banned
NVIDIA Chips,” Wall Street Journal, August 26, 2024.
   186. Akin Gump Export Controls and Economic Sanctions Practice Group, “Com-
merce Imposes Significant New Controls on Advanced Semiconductors,” October 24,
2023.
   187. Akin Gump Export Controls and Economic Sanctions Practice Group, “Com-
merce Imposes Significant New Controls on Advanced Semiconductors,” October 24,
2023.
   188. Aaron Gregg and Cat Zakrzewski, “Microsoft Invests in Arabic AI Firm as U.S.
Tries to Limit China’s Sway,” Washington Post, April 16, 2024.
                                        247
   189. U.S. Department of Commerce, “Taking Additional Steps to Address the Na-
tional Emergency with Respect to Significant Malicious Cyber-Enabled Activities,”
Federal Register 89:19 (January 29, 2024).
   190. Liza Lin, “China Puts Power of State behind AI—and Risks Strangling It,”
Wall Street Journal, July 16, 2024.
   191. Jeremy Daum, “Overview of Draft Measures on Generative AI,” China Law
Translate, April 14, 2023.
   192. Raffaele Huang, “China Moves to Censor AI,” Wall Street Journal, April 11,
2023.
   193. Liza Lin, “China Puts Power of State behind AI—and Risks Strangling It,”
Wall Street Journal, July 16, 2024.
   194. Liza Lin, “China Puts Power of State behind AI—and Risks Strangling It,”
Wall Street Journal, July 16, 2024.
   195. Chang Che and John Liu, “China’s Answer to ChatGPT Gets an Artificial
Debut and Disappoints,” New York Times, March 16, 2023.
   196. Sylvie Zhuang, “China Rolls Out Large Language Model AI Based on Xi Jin-
ping Thought,” South China Morning Post, May 21, 2024.
   197. Sylvie Zhuang, “China Rolls Out Large Language Model AI Based on Xi Jin-
ping Thought,” South China Morning Post, May 21, 2024.
   198. Sylvie Zhuang, “China Rolls Out Large Language Model AI Based on Xi Jin-
ping Thought,” South China Morning Post, May 21, 2024.
   199. McKinsey and Company, “What Is Generative AI?” April 2, 2024; NVIDIA,
“What Is Generative AI.”
   200. Paul Triolo and Kendra Schaefer, “China’s Generative AI Ecosystem in 2024:
Rising Investment and Expectations,” National Bureau of Asian Research, June 27,
2024; Kelly Le, “Chinese Firms Lag behind US Peers in AI Development ‘by Two
Years,’ Alibaba Chairman Joe Tsai Says,” South China Morning Post, April 5, 2024;
Paul Mozur, John Liu, and Cade Metz, “China’s Rush to Dominate A.I. Comes with a
Twist: It Depends on U.S. Technology,” New York Times, February 28, 2024.
   201. Tracy Qu, “Baidu Says Ernie AI Chatbot Now Has 200 Million Users,” Wall
Street Journal, April 16, 2024; Arjun Kharpal, “China’s Baidu Claims Its Ernie Bot
Beats ChatGPT on Key Tests as A.I. Race Heats Up,” CNBC, June 27, 2023; Helen
Toner, Jenny Xiao, and Jeffrey Ding, “The Illusion of China’s AI Prowess,” Foreign Af-
fairs, June 2, 2023; Cheyenne Dong, “Alibaba Rolls Out ChatGPT Alternative Tongyi
Qianwen,” Technode, April 10, 2023; Chang Che and John Liu, “China’s Answer to
ChatGPT Gets an Artificial Debut and Disappoints,” New York Times, March 16, 2023.
   202. Helen Toner, Jenny Xiao, and Jeffrey Ding, “The Illusion of China’s AI Prow-
ess,” Foreign Affairs, June 2, 2023; Cheyenne Dong, “Alibaba Rolls Out ChatGPT
Alternative Tongyi Qianwen,” Technode, April 10, 2023; Chang Che and John Liu,
“China’s Answer to ChatGPT Gets an Artificial Debut and Disappoints,” New York
Times, March 16, 2023.
   203. Tracy Qu, “Baidu Says Ernie AI Chatbot Now Has 200 Million Users,” Wall
Street Journal, April 16, 2024; Arjun Kharpal, “China’s Baidu Claims Its Ernie Bot
Beats ChatGPT on Key Tests as A.I. Race Heats Up,” CNBC, June 27, 2023; Helen
Toner, Jenny Xiao, and Jeffrey Ding, “The Illusion of China’s AI Prowess,” Foreign Af-
fairs, June 2, 2023; Cheyenne Dong, “Alibaba Rolls Out ChatGPT Alternative Tongyi
Qianwen,” Technode, April 10, 2023; Chang Che and John Liu, “China’s Answer to
ChatGPT Gets an Artificial Debut and Disappoints,” New York Times, March 16, 2023.
   204. Paul Mozur, John Liu, and Cade Metz, “China’s Rush to Dominate A.I. Comes
with a Twist: It Depends on U.S. Technology,” New York Times, February 28, 2024.
   205. Kelly Le, “Chinese Firms Lag behind US Peers in AI development ‘by Two
Years,’ Alibaba Chairman Joe Tsai Says,” South China Morning Post, April 5, 2024.
   206. Paul Mozur, John Liu, and Cade Metz, “China’s Rush to Dominate A.I. Comes
with a Twist: It Depends on U.S. Technology,” New York Times, February 28, 2024;
William Marcellino et al., “The Rise of Generative AI and the Coming Era of So-
cial Media Manipulation 3.0 Next-Generation Chinese Astroturfing and Coping with
Ubiquitous AI,” RAND Corporation, 2023, 10.
   207. Paul Triolo and Kendra Schaefer, “China’s Generative AI Ecosystem in 2024:
Rising Investment and Expectations,” National Bureau of Asian Research, June 27,
2024.
   208. Josh Ye, “China’s AI ‘War of a Hundred Models’ Heads for a Shakeout,” Reu-
ters, September 21, 2023.
   209. Paul Triolo and Kendra Schaefer, “China’s Generative AI Ecosystem in 2024:
Rising Investment and Expectations,” National Bureau of Asian Research, June 27,
2024.
   210. Kelly Le, “ ‘Too Many’ AI Models in China: Baidu CEO Warns of Wasted Re-
sources, Lack of Applications,” South China Morning Post, July 5, 2024.
                                        248
   211. Pablo Chavez, “An AI Challenge: Balancing Open and Closed Systems,” CEPA,
May 30, 2023.
   212. Jon Bateman et al., “Beyond Open vs. Closed: Emerging Consensus and Key
Questions for Foundation AI Model Governance,” Carnegie Endowment for Interna-
tional Peace, July 23, 2024.
   213. George Lawton, “Attributes of Open vs. Closed AI Explained,” TechTarget,
July 8, 2024; Pablo Chavez, “An AI Challenge: Balancing Open and Closed Systems,”
CEPA, May 30, 2023.
   214. Qiao Qin’en, “OpenAI Cuts Off Access to Users in China, Hong Kong and
Macau,” Radio Free Asia, July 10, 2024.
   215. Zeyi Yang, “Why Chinese Companies Are Betting on Open-Source AI,” MIT
Technology Review, July 24, 2024; Voice of America, “US Plans to Limit Ameri-
can-Made AI Models in China,” May 12, 2024.
   216. Paul Mozur, John Liu, and Cade Metz, “China’s Rush to Dominate A.I. Comes
with a Twist: It Depends on U.S. Technology,” New York Times, February 21, 2024.
   217. Meaghan Tobin and Cade Metz, “China Is Closing the A.I. Gap with the Unit-
ed States,” New York Times, July 25, 2024.
   218. Meaghan Tobin and Cade Metz, “China Is Closing the A.I. Gap with the Unit-
ed States,” New York Times, July 25, 2024.
   219. Rohit Sehgal, “AI Needs Data More than Data Needs AI,” Forbes, October
5, 2023; Rob Toews, “Synthetic Data Is about to Transform Artificial Intelligence,”
Forbes, June 12, 2022.
   220. Matt Pottinger and David Feith, “The Most Powerful Data Broker in the
World Is Winning the War against the U.S.,” New York Times, November 30, 2021;
Solomon Partners Technology Group, “Data Becomes the New Oil: Businesses Have
Opportunity to Monetize Information as Fuel for AI Models,” Solomon Partners,
March 14, 2024.
   221. Shanna Khayat, “China Has a Digital Grand Strategy. Does the President
Know?” Pacific Forum, March 7, 2023; Dave Dorman and John Hemmings, “Under-
standing Xi Jinping’s Digital Strategy for China,” U.S. Department of State, March
1, 2023.
   222. Central People’s Government of the People’s of the Republic of China, “Nation-
al 13th Five-Year Plan for the Development of Strategic Emerging Industries” (国务
院关于印发“十三五”国家战略性新兴产业发展规划的通知), November 29, 2016. CSET
Translation.
   223. United States Information Technology Office, “President Xi Emphasizes Im-
portance of Big Data”; Lindsay Gorman, “China’s Data Ambitions Strategy, Emerging
Technologies, and Implications for Democracies,” National Bureau of Asian Research,
August 14, 2021.
   224. Xinhua, “Opinions of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on
Building a More Complete System and Mechanism for Market-Oriented Allocation
of Factors”(中共中央 国务院关于构建更加完善的要素市场化配置体制机制的意见), April
9, 2020. Translation. https://web.archive.org/web/20240821164904/https://www.gov.
cn/zhengce/2020-04/09/content_5500622.htm.
   225. Graham Webster, “Translation: Establishing the National Data Administra-
tion (March 2023),” Digichina, March 7, 2023.
   226. Zeyi Yang, “China Just Set Up a New Bureau to Mine Data for Economic
Growth,” MIT Technology Review, March 15, 2023.
   227. National Development and Reform Commission, “Announcement on Soliciting
Public Opinions on the “Three-Year Action Plan for Data Elements × (2024–2026)
(Draft for Comments)” (关于向社会公开征求《“数据要素×”三年行动计划(2024–2026
年)(征求意见稿)》意见的公告[已结束), December 15, 2023. Translation; Qiheng Chen,
“China’s New National Data Bureau: What It Is and What It Is Not,” China Proj-
ect, March 20, 2023; Fan Feifei, “Data Applications Key to Driving China’s Economic
Growth,” China Daily, December 29, 2023.
   228. National Data Administration, “Liu Liehong, Director of the National Bureau
of Statistics, Hosted a Symposium with Entrepreneurs and Listened Carefully to Their
Opinions and Suggestions” (国家数据局局长刘烈宏主持召开企业家座谈会 认真听取企业
意见建议), May 25, 2024. Translation. https://web.archive.org/web/20240829142102/
https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/hkXY5KWPvsYjrVhHX9Ak7A.
   229. Julia Lu, “China’s Data Exchanges, Explained,” Technode, August 17, 2021.
   230. Eleanor Olcott and Wenjie Ding, “China Struggles to Control Data Sales as
Companies Shun Official Exchanges,” Financial Times, December 27, 2023.
   231. Julia Lu, “China’s Data Exchanges, Explained,” Technode, August 17, 2021;
Amba Kak and Samm Sacks, “Shifting Narratives and Emergent Trends in Da-
ta-Governance Policy,” Paul Tsai China Center, AI Now, New America, August 2021.
                                        249
  232. Shanghai Pilot Free Trade Zone, “Shanghai FTZ to Speed Up Data Flow, Coop-
eration,” Shanghai.gov (English), February 7, 2024; Giulia Interesse, “China Releases
New Measures to Further Open-Up Its Free Trade Zones,” China Briefing, July 6, 2023;
China’s Ministry of Commerce, “The Ministry of Commerce Issued the List of Key Tasks
for Pilot Free Trade Zones (2023–2025)” (商务部印发,自贸试验区重点工作清单,2023—
2025年), June 25, 2023. Translation. https://web.archive.org/web/20240829150837/
http://m.mofcom.gov.cn/article/syxwfb/202306/20230603418113.shtml; Barry van
Wyk, “The Chinese Government Wants a Data Trading Market, but It May Never
Happen,” China Project, October 11, 2022; Julia Lu, “China’s Data Exchanges, Ex-
plained,” Technode, August 17, 2021.
  233. Shanghai Pilot Free Trade Zone, “Shanghai FTZ to Speed Up Data Flow, Co-
operation,” Shanghai.gov (English), February 7, 2024; Mu Chen and Yu Tian, “Is Chi-
na Locking Information on the Country Inside a ‘Black Box’?” Baiguan, May 8, 2023;
Barry van Wyk, “The Chinese Government Wants a Data Trading Market, but It May
Never Happen,” China Project, October 11, 2022; Tracy Qu, “How to Buy and Sell
Data? Shanghai Starts New Exchange for Trading Massive Amounts of Data Like
Commodities,” South China Morning Post, November 27, 2021; Julia Lu, “China’s
Data Exchanges, Explained,” Technode, August 17, 2021; Amaya Zhou and Barbara
Li, “Policies Relaxing Data Restrictions Adopted in China’s Free Trade Zones,” Reed
Smith, February 21, 2021; Li Chunguang and Wang Shuo, “Four Aspects of Big Data
Development: Market, Policy, Practice and Challenges” (大数据发展四面观:市场、政
策、实践与挑战), WeChat, January 28, 2021. Translation.
  234. Matt Sheehan, “Much Ado about Data: How America and China Stack Up,”
MacroPolo, June 16, 2019.
  235. Matt Sheehan, “Much Ado about Data: How America and China Stack Up,”
MacroPolo, June 16, 2019.
  236. David Yang et al., “The AI-Surveillance Symbiosis in China: A Big Data China
Event,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, August 18, 2022.
  237. Stanford Center on China’s Economy and Institutions, “Has Access to Gov-
ernment Data Given China’s AI Firms an Innovation Edge?” Stanford University,
June 15, 2022.
  238. Matt Sheehan, “Much Ado about Data: How America and China Stack Up,”
MacroPolo, June 16, 2019.
  239. Matt Sheehan, “Much Ado about Data: How America and China Stack Up,”
MacroPolo, June 16, 2019.
  240. Matt Sheehan, “Much Ado about Data: How America and China Stack Up,”
MacroPolo, June 16, 2019.
  241. Paul Mozur and Cade Metz, “In One Key A.I. Metric, China Pulls ahead of the
U.S.: Talent,” New York Times, March 22, 2024.
  242. Paul Mozur and Cade Metz, “In One Key A.I. Metric, China Pulls ahead of the
U.S.: Talent,” New York Times, March 22, 2024.
  243. MacroPolo, “The Global AI Talent Tracker 2.0,” 2024.
  244. MacroPolo, “The Global AI Talent Tracker 2.0,” 2024.
  245. Dahlia Peterson, Ngor Luong, and Jacob Feldgoise, “Assessing China’s AI
Workforce: Regional, Military, and Surveillance Geographic Clusters,” Center for Se-
curity and Emerging Technology, November 2023.
  246. Center for Security and Emerging Technology, “Country Activity Tracker
(CAT): Artificial Intelligence,” May 29, 2024.
  247. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2023 Annual Report
to Congress, November 2023.
  248. Zahra Khan, “China Conducts Nationwide Audit of Research Misconduct af-
ter Thousands of Papers Retracted Last Year,” Chemistry World, February 16, 2024;
Jeffrey Stoff, Leslie Mcintosh, and An Chi Lee, “Transparency and Integrity Risks
in China’s Research Ecosystem: A Primer and Call to Action,” Center for Research
Security & Integrity, September 2024.
  249. Center for Security and Emerging Technology, “Country Activity Tracker
(CAT): Artificial Intelligence,” September 19, 2024.
  250. Center for Security and Emerging Technology, “Country Activity Tracker
(CAT): Artificial Intelligence,” September 19, 2024.
  251. Jeffrey Ding, “Explaining China’s Diffusion Deficit,” Foreign Policy Research
Institute, September 16, 2024.
  252. Brenda Goh and Paul Sandle, “Exclusive: China Took Part in Leaders’ AI
Meeting Even though UK Did Not Acknowledge,” Reuters, November 3, 2023; UK
Government, The Bletchley Declaration by Countries Attending the AI Safety Summit,
1-2 November 2023, November 1, 2023.
  253. Yukon Huang, Isaac B. Kardon, and Matt Sheehan, “Three Takeaways from
the Biden-Xi Meeting,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, November 16,
                                         250
2023; White House, Readout of President Joe Biden’s Meeting with President Xi Jin-
ping of the People’s Republic of China, November 15, 2023.
   254. Alexandra Alper, “UN Adopts First Global Artificial Intelligence Resolution,”
Reuters, March 21, 2024.
   255. Jamey Keaten, “Top US and Chinese Officials Begin Talks on AI in Gene-
va,” Associated Press, May 15, 2024; White House, Statement from NSC Spokesper-
son Adrienne Watson on the U.S.-PRC Talks on AI Risk and Safety, May 15, 2024;
Huang Da, “China and the United States Hold First Intergovernmental Dialogue
on Artificial Intelligence” (中美举行人工智能政府间对话首次会议), CCTV, May 15,
2024. Translation. https://web.archive.org/web/20240520192253/https://news.cctv.
com/2024/05/15/ARTIIvG55tknLsj93CHilQdX240515.shtml; China’s Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang Wenbin’s Regular Press Con-
ference on May 14, 2024 (2024年5月14日外交部发言人汪文斌主持例行记者会), May 14,
2024. Translation. Bochen Han, “US and China Set for First High-Level Talks on
Artificial Intelligence, US Officials Say,” South China Morning Post, May 13, 2024.
   256. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, China’s Position Paper on Regulating Mil-
itary Applications of Artificial Intelligence (中国关于规范人工智能军事应用的立场文件),
December 14, 2021. Translation; Xinhua, “China Submits Position Paper on Regulat-
ing Military Applications of AI,” December 14, 2021.
   257. People’s Daily, “CCTV Strait Commentary | The Complete Reunification of
the Motherland Must and Will Certainly Be Achieved!” (总台海峡时评丨祖国完全统一
一定要实现,也一定能够实现!)October 19, 2022. Translation; Embassy of the People’s
Republic of China in the United States of America, “Spokesperson of the Standing
Committee of the National People’s Congress Made a Statement on the Visit of U.S.
House Speaker Pelosi to Taiwan, China”, August 2, 2022; China’s Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, China’s Position Paper on Regulating Military Applications of Artificial Intel-
ligence (中国关于规范人工智能军事应用的立场文件), December 14, 2021. Translation.
   258. Alexandra Alper, “UN Adopts First Global Artificial Intelligence Resolution,”
Reuters, March 21, 2024; U.S. Department of State, Political Declaration on Responsi-
ble Military Use of Artificial Intelligence and Autonomy, 2024; Amber Wang, “US-Led
AI Declaration on Responsible Military Use Sees 45 Countries Join, but Not China,”
South China Morning Post, November 14, 2023.
   259. Greg Torode, “US Official Urges China, Russia to Declare Only Humans, Not
AI, Control Nuclear Weapons,” Reuters, May 2, 2024.
   260. Jacob Stokes, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Economic
and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 3; U.S. Department of Defense,
Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s
Republic of China 2023, October 19, 2023, iv, 34, 41.
   261. Zhang Yulong et al., “Technical Framework Design and Key Issues Analysis
in Task-Level Wargame Intelligent Decision Making” (任务级兵棋智能决策技术框架设
计与关键问题分析), Journal of Command and Control 10:1 (February 2024): 19–25.
Translation; Xu Tongle et al., “Development of Cross-Domain Communication Net-
working Technologies for Marine Autonomous Unmanned System” (海洋自主无人系
统跨域通信组网技术发展), Journal of Command and Control 9:6 (December 2023).
Translation; Han Zengliang et al., “Multi-UAH Time Coordinated Path Planning
Based on HME-ABC Algorithm” (基于 HME-ABC 算法的多无人直升机时间协同航路规
划), Journal of Command and Control 9:6 (December 2023). Translation; Li Li et al.,
“Intelligent Generation Mode of Course of Action and Its Situation Characteriza-
tion Method” (作战任务序列智能生成方式及其态势表征方法), Journal of Command and
Control 9:5 (October 2023). Translation; Fei Su and Jingdong Yuan, “Chinese Think-
ing on AI Integration and Interaction with Nuclear Command and Control, Force
Structure, and Decision-Making,” European Leadership Network, November 2023, 3,
5–7; Margarita Konaev et al., “U.S. and Chinese Military AI Purchases: An Assess-
ment of Military Procurement Data between April and November 2020,” Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, August 2023; Zhou Yun, Cheng Chunlei, and Zhao
Jingran, “Drones: From the ‘Shallow’ to the ‘Deep’ Battlefield” (无人机:从战场“浅近”
飞向“纵深”), China Military Online, July 28, 2023. Translation. https://web.archive.
org/web/20240415050807/http://www.81.cn/szb_ 223187/szbxq/index.html?paperNa
me=jfjb&paperDate=2023-07-28&paperNumber=10&articleid=911496; Qiu Chenhui,
“When Missiles Meet Artificial Intelligence” (当导弹遇上人工智能), China Youth Dai-
ly, April 23, 2018. http://web.archive.org/web/20231202011951/http://zqb.cyol.com/
html/2018-04/23/nw.D110000zgqnb_ 20180423_ 2-12.htm.
   262. Margarita Konaev et al., “U.S. and Chinese Military AI Purchases: An Assess-
ment of Military Procurement Data between April and November 2020,” Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, August 2023, 8.
                                        251
   263. Margarita Konaev et al., “U.S. and Chinese Military AI Purchases: An Assess-
ment of Military Procurement Data between April and November 2020,” Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, August 2023, 6, 8.
   264. Margarita Konaev et al., “U.S. and Chinese Military AI Purchases: An Assess-
ment of Military Procurement Data between April and November 2020,” Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, August 2023, 5–7.
   265. Sam Bresnick, “China Bets Big on Military AI,” Center for European Policy
Analysis, April 3, 2024; Gregory C. Allen, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Commission, Hearing on China’s Pursuit of Defense Technologies: Impli-
cations for U.S. and Multilateral Export Control and Investment Screening Regimes,
April 13, 2023, 9–10.
   266. Margarita Konaev et al., “U.S. and Chinese Military AI Purchases: An Assess-
ment of Military Procurement Data between April and November 2020,” Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, August 2023, 10.
   267. Jacob Stokes, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Economic
and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 4–5; Yun Nao Think Tank,
“Application Background of Artificial Intelligence Technology in the Field of Mili-
tary Intelligence” (人工智能技术在军事情报领域的应用背景), January 15, 2024. Trans-
lation. https://web.archive.org/web/20240516190434/https://m.chuandong.com/tech/
tech46839.html; Zhang Dongrun and Zhang Wenhong, “Intelligent Evolution of Un-
manned Reconnaissance” (无人侦察的智能化嬗变), China Military Online, July 28,
2022. Translation. https://web.archive.org/web/20240516183959/http://www.81.cn/
jfjbmap/content/2022-07/28/content_320794.htm; U.S. National Intelligence Council,
Global Trends 2040, March 2021, 7.
   268. Yun Nao Think Tank, “Application Background of Artificial Intelligence Tech-
nology in the Field of Military Intelligence” (人工智能技术在军事情报领域的应用背
景), January 15, 2024. Translation; Zhang Dongrun and Zhang Wenhong, “Intelligent
Evolution of Unmanned Reconnaissance” (无人侦察的智能化嬗变), China Military On-
line, July 28, 2022. Translation. https://web.archive.org/web/20240516183959/http://
www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2022-07/28/content_320794.htm; Chen Xi, Ge Tengfei,
and Song Daoqing, “An Assessment of the Impact of Intelligent Intelligence Means
on the Strategic Stability of Great Powers” (智能化情报手段对大国战略稳定的影响评
估), Journal of Intelligence 40:6 (June 2021): 16. Translation. https://web.archive.
org/web/20240117212543/https://m.fx361.com/news/2021/0103/14051841.html; Gao
Tianfu et al., “Analysis and Research about the Application of AI Technology on the
Submarine Combat System” (人工智能技术在潜艇作战系统中应用分析), Ship Science
and Technology 42:11 (2020). Translation.
   269. U.S. Department of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security
Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2023, October 19, 2023, 34.
   270. Margarita Konaev et al., “U.S. and Chinese Military AI Purchases: An Assess-
ment of Military Procurement Data between April and November 2020,” Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, August 2023, 10.
   271. Liu Xuanzun and Fan Wei, “China’s Wing Loong Drones to See More Appli-
cations, Become More Intelligent: Chief Designer,” Global Times, December 1, 2023.
   272. Margarita Konaev et al., “U.S. and Chinese Military AI Purchases: An Assess-
ment of Military Procurement Data between April and November 2020,” Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, August 2023, 11.
   273. Zhang Yulong et al., “Technical Framework Design and Key Issues Analysis
in Task-Level Wargame Intelligent Decision Making” (任务级兵棋智能决策技术框架设
计与关键问题分析), Journal of Command and Control 10:1 (February 2024). Trans-
lation; Chen Lei and Yang Lianzhen, “Looking Forward to Military Governance in
the Intelligent Era” (前瞻智能化时代军事治理), China Military Online, January 11,
2024. Translation. https://web.archive.org/web/20240215105353/http://www.81.cn/
ll_ 208543/16279771.html; Li Li et al., “Intelligent Generation Mode of Course of Ac-
tion and Its Situation Characterization Method” (作战任务序列智能生成方式及其态势
表征方法), Journal of Command and Control 9:5 (October 2023). Translation; Margar-
ita Konaev et al., “U.S. and Chinese Military AI Purchases: An Assessment of Mili-
tary Procurement Data between April and November 2020,” Center for Security and
Emerging Technology, August 2023, 5–7; U.S. National Intelligence Council, Global
Trends 2040, March 2021, 7.
   274. Liu Xia, “Artificial Intelligence May Change the Future Battlefield” (人工
智能或将改变未来战场), Science and Technology Daily, November 21, 2023. Trans-
lation.      https://web.archive.org/web/20240510092951/http://digitalpaper.stdaily.
com/http_www.kjrb.com/kjrb/html/2023-11/21/content_562885.htm?div=-1;           Yang
Zi, “How China Leverages Artificial Intelligence for Military Decision-Making,” in
Roy D. Kamphausen, ed., China’s Military Decision-Making in Times of Crisis and
                                        252
Conflict, National Bureau of Asian Research, 2023, 83–84; Military Digest, “The Art
of Decision-Making! How Does Artificial Intelligence Empower the ‘Joint All-Do-
main Combat Command and Control System?’ ” (决策的艺术！人工智能如何赋能 “
联合全域作战指控体系”), December 27, 2021. Translation. https://web.archive.org/
web/20220415012546/http://www.%E5%9B%BD%E9%98%B2%E6%95%99%E8%82
%B2%E7%BD%91.com/show-82-213-1.html; Li Bin, “Li Bin: The Role of Machines in
Military Activities and Compliance with International Law” (李彬:军事活动中机器的
角色与国际法的合规), The Paper, January 30, 2021. Translation. https://web.archive.
org/web/20240510103158/https://www.thepaper.cn/newsDetail_forward_11025528.
   275. Fiona S. Cunningham, “The Unknowns about China’s Nuclear Modernization
Program,” Arms Control Association, June 2023; Center for Strategic and Internation-
al Studies, “How Did the 20th Party Congress Impact China’s Military?” October 25,
2022; John Chen, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on China’s Cyber Capabilities: Warfare, Espionage, and Impli-
cations for the United States, February 17, 2022, 7–8; David Bickers, “Understanding
the Vulnerabilities in China’s New Joint Force,” Joint Force Quarterly 103:4 (2021):
83; David C. Logan, “PLA Reforms and China’s Nuclear Forces,” Joint Force Quarterly
83:4 (2016): 61.
   276. Yang Zi, “How China Leverages Artificial Intelligence for Military Deci-
sion-Making,” in Roy D. Kamphausen, ed., China’s Military Decision-Making in Times
of Crisis and Conflict, National Bureau of Asian Research, 2023, 69, 83–84.
   277. Bochen Han, “US and China Set for First High-level Talks on Artificial Intel-
ligence, US Officials Say,” South China Morning Post, May 13, 2024.
   278. Fu Yongqing, Zhang Yuan, and Tan Bao, “Digital Revolution: Data Drives Future
Warfare” (数字革命: 数据驱动未来战争), China Military Online, June 24, 2023. Trans-
lation. https://web.archive.org/web/20240605153946/http://www.81.cn/szb_ 223187/
szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-06-24&paperNumber=03&artic
leid=908715; Yang Zi, “How China Leverages Artificial Intelligence for Military Deci-
sion-Making,” in Roy D. Kamphausen, ed., China’s Military Decision-Making in Times
of Crisis and Conflict, National Bureau of Asian Research, 2023, 74; Song Yuangang,
Shao Longfei, and Wang Han, “Military Big Data: An Accelerator of Military Intel-
ligence Transformation” (军事大数据: 军事智能变革的加速器), PLA Daily, September
6, 2019. Translation. https://web.archive.org/web/20240605155039/http://www.mod.
gov.cn/gfbw/gfjy_index/zyhd/4849900.html.
   279. Song Yuangang, Shao Longfei, and Wang Han, “Military Big Data: An Accelera-
tor of Military Intelligence Transformation” (军事大数据: 军事智能变革的加速器), PLA
Daily, September 6, 2019. Translation. https://web.archive.org/web/20240605155039/
http://www.mod.gov.cn/gfbw/gfjy_index/zyhd/4849900.html.
   280. Yang Zi, “How China Leverages Artificial Intelligence for Military Deci-
sion-Making,” in Roy D. Kamphausen, ed., China’s Military Decision-Making in Times
of Crisis and Conflict, National Bureau of Asian Research, 2023, 74.
   281. Jacob Stokes, Alexander Sullivan, and Noah Greene, “U.S.-China Competition
and Military AI: How Washington Can Manage Strategic Risks amid Rivalry with
Beijing,” Center for a New American Security, July 2023, 7; Xu Zhidong and Yang Lei,
“Manage the Risks of Intelligentization” (管控好智能化风险),People’s Liberation Army
Daily, May 7, 2020. Translation.
   282. Jacob Stokes, Alexander Sullivan, and Noah Greene, “U.S.-China Competition
and Military AI: How Washington Can Manage Strategic Risks amid Rivalry with
Beijing,” Center for a New American Security, July 2023, 11; Xu Zhidong and Yang
Lei, “Manage the Risks of Intelligentization” (管控好智能化风险), China Military On-
line, May 7, 2020. Translation.
   283. Margarita Konaev et al., “U.S. and Chinese Military AI Purchases: An As-
sessment of Military Procurement Data between April and November 2020,” Center
for Security and Emerging Technology, August 2023, 14–15; Global Times, “Oddly
Shaped Chinese Combat-Ready Helicopter Drone Popular in International Market,”
April 3, 2019; Zhuhai Ziyuan UAS, “Recon-Attack Unmanned Helicopter.” https://web.
archive.org/web/20230807125208/https:/www.ziyanuav.com/en/list/374.html.
   284. Kelley M. Sayler, “Defense Primer: U.S. Policy on Lethal Autonomous Weapon
Systems,” Congressional Research Service IF11150, February 1, 2024, 1; Margarita
Konaev et al., “U.S. and Chinese Military AI Purchases: An Assessment of Military
Procurement Data between April and November 2020,” Center for Security and
Emerging Technology, August 2023, 14–15; Global Times, “Oddly Shaped Chinese
Combat-Ready Helicopter Drone Popular in International Market,” April 3, 2019;
Zhuhai Ziyuan UAS, “Recon-Attack Unmanned Helicopter.”
   285. Kelley M. Sayler, “Defense Primer: U.S. Policy on Lethal Autonomous Weapon
Systems,” Congressional Research Service IF11150, February 1, 2024, 1–2.
                                       253
   286. United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, “Lethal Autonomous Weapon
Systems (LAWS).”
   287. Margarita Konaev et al., “U.S. and Chinese Military AI Purchases: An Assess-
ment of Military Procurement Data between April and November 2020,” Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, August 2023, 4–6, 14–15.
   288. Global Times, “Oddly Shaped Chinese Combat-Ready Helicopter Drone Popu-
lar in International Market,” April 3, 2019; Zhuhai Ziyuan UAS, “Recon-Attack Un-
manned Helicopter.”
   289. Global Times, “Oddly Shaped Chinese Combat-Ready Helicopter Drone Popu-
lar in International Market,” April 3, 2019; Zhuhai Ziyuan UAS, “Recon-Attack Un-
manned Helicopter.”
   290. Nathan Beauchamp-Mustafaga, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies
in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 1–2;
Jessica Brandt, “Propaganda, Foreign Interference, and Generative AI,” Brookings In-
stitution, November 8, 2023; Katrina Manson, “The US Military Is Taking Generative
AI Out for a Spin,” Bloomberg, July 5, 2023; William Marcellino et al., “The Rise of
Generative AI and the Coming Era of Social Media Manipulation 3.0 Next-Genera-
tion Chinese Astroturfing and Coping with Ubiquitous AI,” RAND Corporation, 2023,
6, 10; Koichiro Takagi, “The Future of China’s Cognitive Warfare: Lessons from the
War in Ukraine,” War on the Rocks, July 22, 2022.
   291. Albert Zhang, Tilla Hoja, and Jasmine Latimore, “Gaming Public Opinion: The
CCP’s Increasingly Sophisticated Cyber-Enabled Influence Operations,” Australian
Strategic Policy Institute, April 24, 2023, 5.
   292. Nathan Beauchamp-Mustafaga, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies
in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 1–2;
Albert Zhang, Tilla Hoja, and Jasmine Latimore, “Gaming Public Opinion: The CCP’s
Increasingly Sophisticated Cyber-Enabled Influence Operations,” Australian Strategic
Policy Institute, April 24, 2023, 11–18; Craig Timberg and Shane Harris, “Chinese
Network of Fake Accounts Targets Trump with English-language Videos,” Washing-
ton Post, August 12, 2020.
   293. Nathan Beauchamp-Mustafaga, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies
in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 1–2.
   294. Microsoft Threat Intelligence, “Same Targets, New Playbooks: East Asia
Threat Actors Employ Unique Methods,” April 2024, 6–8; Guy Rosen, “Raising Online
Defenses through Transparency and Collaboration,” Meta, August 29, 2023; Albert
Zhang, Tilla Hoja, and Jasmine Latimore, “Gaming Public Opinion: The CCP’s In-
creasingly Sophisticated Cyber-Enabled Influence Operations,” Australian Strategic
Policy Institute, April 24, 2023, 1.
   295. Microsoft, “How Microsoft Names Threat Actors,” April 29, 2024; Microsoft
Threat Intelligence, “Same Targets, New Playbooks: East Asia Threat Actors Employ
Unique Methods,” April 2024, 6, 8.
   296. Microsoft Threat Intelligence, “Same Targets, New Playbooks: East Asia
Threat Actors Employ Unique Methods,” April 2024, 9.
   297. Microsoft Threat Intelligence, “Same Targets, New Playbooks: East Asia
Threat Actors Employ Unique Methods,” April 2024, 6–8.
   298. Nathan Beauchamp-Mustafaga, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies
in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 2;
William Marcellino et al., “The Rise of Generative AI and the Coming Era of So-
cial Media Manipulation 3.0 Next-Generation Chinese Astroturfing and Coping with
Ubiquitous AI,” RAND Corporation, 2023, 15–19.
   299. William Marcellino et al., “The Rise of Generative AI and the Coming Era of
Social Media Manipulation 3.0 Next-Generation Chinese Astroturfing and Coping
with Ubiquitous AI,” RAND Corporation, 2023, 16; Wang Yunlong and Zhang Zhiwei,
“Emerging Communication Technology Revolution and Developmental Trends in Mil-
itary Struggle for Public Opinion” (新兴传播技术革命与军事舆论斗争发展趋势), China
Military Science, August 2020, 103–104. Translation.
   300. Nathan Beauchamp-Mustafaga, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies
in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 4, 11;
Li Bicheng, Hu Huaping, and Xiong Yao, “Intelligent Agent Model for Online Public
Opinion Guidance” (网络舆情引导智能代理模型), National Defense Technology 3 (2019).
Translation. https://web.archive.org/web/20240428215845/https://oversea.cnki.net/
KCMS/detail/detail.aspx?dbcode=CJFD&dbname=CJFDLAST2019&filename=GFC
                                        254
K201903014&uniplatform=OVERSEA&v=RDZVWbo4dFB0w_ DlbNDwQnhbaLWI2
mRIE9eFLE9PSIXN5WUjcJqaZPFo-fg5W_VC; John Costello and Joe McReynolds,
“China’s Strategic Support Force: A Force for a New Era,” in Phillip C. Saunders et
al., eds., Chairman Xi Remakes the PLA: Assessing Chinese Military Reforms, Na-
tional Defense University Press, 2019, 452; Elsa B. Kania, “The Role of PLA Base
311 in Political Warfare against Taiwan (Part 3),” Global Taiwan Institute, February
15, 2017.
    301. People’s Daily, “When Will Humanoid Robots Enter Every Household?” (人形
机器人何时进入千家万户), March 17, 2024. Translation; Jose Antonio Lanz, “AI Re-
searchers Are Teaching Robots to Mimic Human Dexterity,” Emerge, August 24, 2023.
    302. People’s Daily, “When Will Humanoid Robots Enter Every Household?” (人形
机器人何时进入千家万户), March 17, 2024. Translation.
    303. China’s Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, Notice of the Minis-
try of Industry and Information Technology on Issuing the “Guiding Opinions on the
Innovation and Development of Humanoid Robots” (工业和信息化部关于印发《人形机
器人创新发展指导意见》的通知), October 20, 2023. Translation; Ministry of Industry
and Information Technology, Guiding Opinion on the Innovation and Development
of Humanoid Robots (人形机器人创新发展指导意见), November 2, 2023, Translation;
Yuanyue Dang, “China Says Humanoid Robots Are New Engine of Growth, Pushes
for Mass Production by 2025 and World Leadership by 2027,” South China Morning
Post, November 3, 2023.
    304. Evan Ackerman, “Humanoid Robots Are Getting to Work,” IEEE Spectrum,
December 30, 2023; Randal C. Nelson, “Robot Actuators,” University of Rochester.
    305. Charlie Kemp, “It Cooks, It Cleans! When Will Robots Be Doing Our Chores?”
Wall Street Journal, Podcast, September 13, 2024; Nick Huber, “ ‘Humanoid’ Robot
Wave Signals Change on the Production Line,” Financial Times, March 26, 2024.
    306. Wang Huawei, “Discussing Criminal Liability in the Governance of Human-
oid Robots” (论人形机器人治理中的刑法归责), May 20, 2024. Translation. https://web.
archive.org/web/20241001193945/http://www.chv.org.cn/sjzk/1358.html; Gaze into
the Sky [NetEase Blog], “The Rise of China’s Humanoid Robot Industry Will Replace
the People’s Liberation Army in Performing Tasks, Making the Great Task of Reuni-
fication Easier” (中国人形机器人产业崛起，代替解放军执行任务，让统一大业更轻松),
April 15, 2024. Translation; China’s Ministry of Industry and Information Technology,
Guiding Opinion on the Innovation and Development of Humanoid Robots (人形机器
人创新发展指导意见), November 2, 2023, Translation.
    307. Elsa B. Kania, “In Military-Civil Fusion, China Is Learning Lessons from the
United States and Starting to Innovate,” Strategy Bridge, August 27, 2019.
    308. Wang Yonghua, “Pay Attention to the Military Application of Humanoid Ro-
bots” (关注人形机器人军事运用), China Military Online, June 13, 2023. Translation;
Guo Bingxin, Zhong Yuhang, and Lei Hongyu, “Popular Science on Chinese Mili-
tary Technology: Do the Ever-Changing Humanoid Robots Dream of Going to the
Battlefield?” (科普中国军事科技]日新月异的类人机器人会梦见上战场吗?), Guangming
Science Popularization, March 28, 2023. Translation; Luo Ling, “ ‘Smart Robot’ Im-
proves Combat Effectiveness” (“灵巧机器人”提升战斗力), PLA Daily, March 8, 2019.
Translation.
    309. Wang Yonghua, “Focus on the Military Application of Humanoid Robots” (关
注人形机器人军事运用), China Military Online, June 13, 2023. https://web.archive.
org/web/20240429133710/http://www.81.cn/szb_ 223187/szbxq/index.html?paperN
ame=jfjb&paperDate=2023-06-13&paperNumber=07&articleid=908058; Luo Ling,
“ ‘Smart Robot’ Improves Combat Effectiveness” (“灵巧机器人”提升战斗力), PLA
Daily, March 8, 2019. Translation. https://web.archive.org/web/20200623024514/
http:/military.people.com.cn/n1/2019/0308/c1011-30964831.html; Fu Qianshao, “The
Rise of China’s Humanoid Robot Industry Will Replace the People’s Liberation Army
in Performing Tasks, Making the Reunification Easier” ( 中国人形机器人产业崛起，代
替解放军执行任务，让统一大业更轻松), YouTube, April 17, 2024. Translation.
    310. Ryan McMorrow, “China’s Army Tests Gun-Toting Version of Robot Dog,” Fi-
nancial Times, May 30, 2024.
    311. Ryan McMorrow, “China’s Army Tests Gun-Toting Version of Robot Dog,” Fi-
nancial Times, May 30, 2024.
    312. Ryan McMorrow, “China’s Army Tests Gun-Toting Version of Robot Dog,” Fi-
nancial Times, May 30, 2024.
    313. Ryan McMorrow, “China’s Army Tests Gun-Toting Version of Robot Dog,” Fi-
nancial Times, May 30, 2024.
    314. Mandy Zuo, “China Wants Humanoid Robots to Automate Aged Care, Handle
Grunt Work as Demographics Shift,” South China Morning Post, July 17, 2024.
    315. Che Pan, “Tesla Shows Its Humanoid Robot Optimus at China AI Conference,
but behind Glass,” South China Morning Post, July 5, 2024.
                                        255
   316. Goldman Sachs, “The Global Market for Humanoid Robots Could Reach $38
Billion by 2035,” February 27, 2024.
   317. Goldman Sachs, “The Global Market for Humanoid Robots Could Reach $38
Billion by 2035,” February 27, 2024.
   318. Goldman Sachs, “The Global Market for Humanoid Robots Could Reach $38
Billion by 2035,” February 27, 2024.
   319. Hrvoje Kukina, “Economic Aspects of Progress in Quantum Technologies,”
Stanford Center for Responsible Quantum Technology.
   320. Beth Stackpole, “Quantum Computing: What Leaders Need to Know Now,”
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Sloan School of Management, January 11,
2024; Center for Strategic and International Studies, “Is China a Leader in Quantum
Technologies?” August 15, 2023; Sam Howell, “The China-US Quantum Race,” Diplo-
mat, January 13, 2023; John Workman, “Computing Power and the New World Or-
der,” Pathstone, December 10, 2021; Paul Smith-Goodson, “Quantum USA vs. Quan-
tum China: The World’s Most Important Technology Race,” Forbes, October 10, 2019;
Interagency Working Group on Quantum Information Science of the Subcommittee
on Physical Sciences, Advancing Quantum Information Science: National Challenges
and Opportunities, July 2016, 2; IBM, “What Is Quantum Computing.”
   321. Arthur Herman, “The Quantum Revolution Is Now,” Hudson Institute, Feb-
ruary 29, 2024; James Andrew Lewis and Georgia Wood, “Quantum Technology: Ap-
plications and Implications,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, May 25,
2023.
   322. National Institutes of Health, What Is Quantum Information Science (QIS)?
May 3, 2024; Edward Parker, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Securi-
ty Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 2; Edward Park-
er, “Commercial and Military Applications and Timelines for Quantum Technology,”
RAND Corporation, 2021, v.
   323. Edward Parker, “Commercial and Military Applications and Timelines for
Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, 2021, v.
   324. BAE Systems, “What Is Quantum Sensing?”
   325. Edward Parker, “Commercial and Military Applications and Timelines for
Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, 2021, v.
   326. McKinsey and Company, “What Is Quantum Computing?” April 5, 2024.
   327. Edward Parker, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Eco-
nomic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 3; Center for Strategic
and International Studies, “Is China a Leader in Quantum Technologies?” August
15, 2023.
   328. Edward Parker, “Commercial and Military Applications and Timelines for
Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, 2021, v.
   329. Joelle Carson, “The Next Quantum Revolution,” MIT Spectrum (Spring 2024).
   330. Edward Parker, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Eco-
nomic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 4.
   331. Edward Parker, written response to question for the record for U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging
Technologies in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February
1, 2024, 2.
   332. Edward Parker, written response to question for the record for U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging
Technologies in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February
1, 2024, 3.
   333. Edward Parker, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Eco-
nomic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 4.
   334. Jean-François Bobier et al., “Are You Ready for Quantum Communications?”
Boston Consulting Group, March 22, 2023.
   335. Edward Parker, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 2; Edward Park-
er, “Commercial and Military Applications and Timelines for Quantum Technology,”
RAND Corporation, 2021, v.
   336. Xinhua, “Xi Focus: Xi Stresses Advancing Development of Quantum Science
and Technology,” October 17, 2020.
   337. White House, Fact Sheet: Biden-Harris Administration Continues Work to Se-
cure a Post-Quantum Cryptography Future, August 13, 2024.
                                       256
   338. Edward Parker, “Commercial and Military Applications and Timelines for
Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, 2021, 2.
   339. Edward Parker, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 5–6; Edward Parker
et al., “An Assessment of the U.S. and Chinese Industrial Bases in Quantum Technol-
ogy,” RAND Corporation, vii, 84, 86.
   340. Edward Parker et al., “An Assessment of the U.S. and Chinese Industrial Bas-
es in Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, February 2, 2022, 79.
   341. Edward Parker et al., “An Assessment of the U.S. and Chinese Industrial Bas-
es in Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, February 2, 2022, 79.
   342. Edward Parker et al., “An Assessment of the U.S. and Chinese Industrial Bas-
es in Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, February 2, 2022, 84, 86; Origin
Quantum, “About Origin Quantum”; QuantumCTek, “QuantumCTek Headquarters
and Office Locations.”
   343. Edward Parker et al., “An Assessment of the U.S. and Chinese Industrial Bas-
es in Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, February 2, 2022, 84.
   344. Edward Parker, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Eco-
nomic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 6.
   345. Edward Parker et al., “An Assessment of the U.S. and Chinese Industrial Bas-
es in Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, vi; National Science and Technology
Council, Committee on Science, National Quantum Initiative Supplement to the Pres-
ident’s FY 2024 Budget, December 2023, 5.
   346. Edward Parker et al., “An Assessment of the U.S. and Chinese Industrial Bas-
es in Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, 44.
   347. National Science and Technology Council, Committee on Science, National
Quantum Initiative Supplement to the President’s FY 2024 Budget, December 2023, 3.
   348. Nigel Howard et al., “Quantum Computing: Developments in the UK and US,”
Covington Global Policy Watch, August 9, 2024.
   349. Edward Parker et al., “An Assessment of the U.S. and Chinese Industrial Bas-
es in Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, 45–47.
   350. Edward Parker et al., “An Assessment of the U.S. and Chinese Industrial Bas-
es in Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, vi, 46–47.
   351. Edward Parker et al., “An Assessment of the U.S. and Chinese Industrial
Bases in Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, 49; Quantum Insider, “State of
Quantum Report 2024,” January 29, 2024.
   352. Edward Parker, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Eco-
nomic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 3.
   353. Edward Parker et al., “An Assessment of the U.S. and Chinese Industrial Bas-
es in Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, February 2, 2022, vi.
   354. Edward Parker et al., “An Assessment of the U.S. and Chinese Industrial Bas-
es in Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, February 2, 2022, vi.
   355. Edward Parker et al., “An Assessment of the U.S. and Chinese Industrial Bas-
es in Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, February 2, 2022, 34, 74.
   356. Patrick Tucker, “Is China about to Destroy Encryption as We Know It? May-
be,” Defense One, January 20, 2023; Richard Waters, “Chinese Researchers Claim to
Find Way to Break Encryption Using Quantum Computers,” Financial Times, Jan-
uary 4, 2023; Stephen Chen, “Chinese Team Says Quantum Physics Project Moves
Radar Closer to Detecting Stealth Aircraft,” South China Morning Post, September 3,
2021; Jeffrey Lin and P.W. Singer, “China’s Latest Quantum Radar Could Help Detect
Stealth Planes, Missiles,” China Aerospace Studies Institute, July 11, 2018.
   357. Zhang Tong, “Chinese Scientists Hack Encryption on Quantum Computer: Pa-
per,” South China Morning Post, October 17, 2024; Mark Tyson, “Chinese Scientists
Use Quantum Computers to Crack Military-Grade Encryption—Quantum Attack
Poses a ‘Real and Substantial Threat’ to RSA and AES,” Tom’s Hardware, October 14,
2024; Wang Chao et al., “Quantum Annealing Public Key Cryptographic Attack Algo-
rithm Based on D-Wave Advantage” (基于D-Wave Advantage的量子退火公钥密码攻击
算法研究), Chinese Journal of Computers 47:5 (May 2024): 1030–1031. Translation.
   358. Zhang Tong, “Chinese Scientists Hack Encryption on Quantum Computer: Pa-
per,” South China Morning Post, October 17, 2024.
   359. Zhang Tong, “Chinese Scientists Hack Encryption on Quantum Computer: Pa-
per,” South China Morning Post, October 17, 2024.
   360. Zhang Tong, “Chinese Scientists Hack Encryption on Quantum Computer: Pa-
per,” South China Morning Post, October 17, 2024.
                                       257
   361. Craig S. Smith, “Debunking Hype: China Hasn’t Broken Military Encryption
with Quantum,” Forbes, October 16, 2024.
   362. Patrick Tucker, “Is China about to Destroy Encryption as We Know It? May-
be,” Defense One, January 20, 2023; Richard Waters, “Chinese Researchers Claim to
Find Way to Break Encryption Using Quantum Computers,” Financial Times, Jan-
uary 4, 2023.
   363. Stephen Chen, “Chinese Scientists’ Claims for New Quantum Code-Breaking
Algorithm Raise Eyebrows in the US,” South China Morning Post, January 11, 2023;
Richard Waters, “Chinese Researchers Claim to Find Way to Break Encryption Using
Quantum Computers,” Financial Times, January 4, 2023.
   364. Richard Waters, “Chinese Researchers Claim to Find Way to Break Encryp-
tion Using Quantum Computers,” Financial Times, January 4, 2023.
   365. Stephen Chen, “Chinese Scientists’ Claims for New Quantum Code-Breaking
Algorithm Raise Eyebrows in the US,” South China Morning Post, January 11, 2023.
   366. Global Times, “China-Made Quantum Computing Thermometer Makes
New Temperature Measuring Record, Enhances Tech Self-Reliance,” June 16, 2024;
QuantumCTek, “The Actual Operating Indicators of Guodun Dilution Refrigera-
tor Have Reached the International Mainstream Level” (国盾稀释制冷机实际运行
指标达已达国际主流水平), February 29, 2024. Translation. https://web.archive.org/
web/20240426005816/http://www.quantum-info.com/News/qy/2024/2024/0320/783.
html; Matt Swayne, “Reports: China Mass Producing Dilution Refrigerator Critical
to Superconducting Quantum Computing,” Quantum Insider, February 28, 2024.
   367. Anhui Daily, “[Anhui Daily] New Breakthroughs Have Been Made in Key
Domestic Superconducting Quantum Computing Equipment” ([安徽日报]国产超导量
子计算关键设备取得新突破), February 29, 2024. Translation.
   368. People’s Daily, “Quantum Computer Core Components Achieve Breakthrough
in Anhui” (量子计算机核心部件在安徽实现突破), May 16, 2024.
   369. Dannie Peng, “China Replaces Imported Quantum Computer Component with
Domestic Product Immediately after U.S. Sanctions,” South China Morning Post, May
18, 2024.
   370. Dannie Peng, “China Replaces Imported Quantum Computer Component with
Domestic Product Immediately after U.S. Sanctions,” South China Morning Post,
May 18, 2024; People’s Daily, “Quantum Computer Core Components Achieve Break-
through in Anhui” (量子计算机核心部件在安徽实现突破), May 16, 2024. Translation.
   371. Dannie Peng, “China Replaces Imported Quantum Computer Component with
Domestic Product Immediately after U.S. Sanctions,” South China Morning Post, May
18, 2024.
   372. Zhang Chao, Wang Yuanhe, and Jiang Xuefeng, “Quantum Radar with Vor-
tex Microwave Photons” (涡旋微波量子雷达), Journal of Radars 10:5 (October 2021):
749. Translation. https://web.archive.org/web/20220803174543/https://radars.ac.cn/
cn/article/doi/10.12000/JR21095; Stephen Chen, “Chinese Team Says Quantum
Physics Project Moves Radar Closer to Detecting Stealth Aircraft,” South China
Morning Post, September 3, 2021; Xinhua, “My Country’s First Single-Photon De-
tection Quantum Radar Prototype Debuts at Zhuhai Air Show” (我国首部单光子检测
量子雷达样机亮相珠海航展), November 8, 2018. Translation. https://web.archive.org/
web/20220924060018/http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2018-11/08/c_1123684731.
htm.
   373. Xinhua, “My Country’s First Single-Photon Detection Quantum Radar Pro-
totype Debuts at Zhuhai Air Show” (我国首部单光子检测量子雷达样机亮相珠海航展),
November 8, 2019. Translation.
   374. Zhang Chao, Wang Yuanhe, and Jiang Xuefeng, “Quantum Radar with Vortex
Microwave Photons” (涡旋微波量子雷达), Journal of Radars 10:5 (October 2021): 749.
Translation; Stephen Chen, “Chinese Team Says Quantum Physics Project Moves
Radar Closer to Detecting Stealth Aircraft,” South China Morning Post, September
3, 2021.
   375. Stephen Chen, “Chinese Team Says Quantum Physics Project Moves Radar
Closer to Detecting Stealth Aircraft,” South China Morning Post, September 3, 2021;
Adrian Cho, “The Short, Strange Life of Quantum Radar,” Science, September 25,
2020.
   376. Edward Parker, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Eco-
nomic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 3–4; Victoria Bela, “Chi-
na and Russia Test ‘Hack-Proof’ Quantum Communication Link for Brics Countries,”
South China Morning Post, December 30, 2023; Aleksandr V. Khmelev et al., “Eur-
asian-Scale Experimental Satellite-Based Quantum Key Distribution with Detector
Efficiency Mismatch Analysis,” October 27, 2023, 1, 8; Center for Strategic and In-
ternational Studies, “Is China a Leader in Quantum Technologies?” August 15, 2023;
                                        258
China Daily, “World’s First Integrated Quantum Communication Network,” January
7, 2021; Yu-Ao Chen et al., “An Integrated Space-to-Ground Quantum Communica-
tion Network over 4,600 Kilometers,” Nature 589 (January 2021): 214. https://web.
archive.org/web/20240425202242/https://subsites.chinadaily.com.cn/nccst/2021-
01/07/c_668029.htm.
   377. Juljan Krause, “The Quantum Race: U.S.-Chinese Competition for Leadership
in Quantum Technologies,” University of California Institute on Global Conflict and
Cooperation, February 28, 2024, 1, 4; Edward Parker, oral testimony for U.S.-Chi-
na Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging
Technologies in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February
1, 2024, 172; John Costello, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Pursuit of Next Frontier Tech: Computing,
Robotics, and Biotechnology, March 16, 2017, 5–6; Ma Jia, “Eavesdropping, Invisible
Radio Waves” (窃听, 看不见的电波), China Science News, November 9, 2013. Transla-
tion.
   378. Edward Parker, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Eco-
nomic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 3–4.
   379. Edward Parker, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 3–4; Yu-Ao Chen et
al., “An Integrated Space-to-Ground Quantum Communication Network over 4,600
Kilometers,” Nature 589 (January 2021): 214; China Daily, “World’s First Integrated
Quantum Communication Network,” January 7, 2021.
   380. Edward Parker, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Eco-
nomic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 4; Stephen Chen, “China
Launches New Satellite in ‘Important Step’ towards Global Quantum Communica-
tions Network,” South China Morning Post, July 27, 2022.
   381. Edward Parker, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Eco-
nomic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 4; Victoria Bela, “China
and Russia Test ‘Hack-Proof’ Quantum Communication Link for BRICS Countries,”
South China Morning Post, December 30, 2023; Aleksandr V. Khmelev et al., “Eur-
asian-Scale Experimental Satellite-Based Quantum Key Distribution with Detector
Efficiency Mismatch Analysis,” October 27, 2023, 1, 8.
   382. U.S. Department of Commerce, Commerce Adds 37 PRC Entities to Entity List
for Enabling PRC Quantum and Aerospace Programs, Aiding Russian Aggression in
Ukraine, May 9, 2024; U.S. Department of Commerce, Commerce Lists Entities In-
volved in the Support of PRC Military Quantum Computing Applications, Pakistani
Nuclear and Missile Proliferation, and Russia’s Military, November 24, 2021.
   383. U.S. Department of Commerce, Addition of Entities and Revision of Entries
on the Entity List; and Addition of Entity to the Military End-User (MEU) List, No-
vember 26, 2021; Chris Sanders, “China Criticizes U.S. for Putting Chinese Firms on
Trade Blacklist,” Reuters, November 25, 2021; U.S. Department of Commerce, Com-
merce Lists Entities Involved in the Support of PRC Military Quantum Computing
Applications, Pakistani Nuclear and Missile Proliferation, and Russia’s Military, No-
vember 24, 2021.
   384. U.S. Department of Commerce, Commerce Adds 37 PRC Entities to Entity List
for Enabling PRC Quantum and Aerospace Programs, Aiding Russian Aggression in
Ukraine, May 9, 2024.
   385. U.S. Department of Commerce, Department of Commerce Implements Controls
on Quantum Computing and Other Advanced Technologies Alongside International
Partners, September 5, 2024, 2.
   386. U.S. Department of Commerce, Department of Commerce Implements Controls
on Quantum Computing and Other Advanced Technologies Alongside International
Partners, September 5, 2024; Kevin Wolf, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Level-
ing the U.S.-China Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024,
15–16; Jasper Helder et al., “International Unilateral Export Controls—An Increased
Focus on Advanced Technologies,” Akin Gump, April 5, 2024; Dallin Grimm, “Myste-
rious Quantum Computing Restrictions Spread across Multiple Nations—UK Cites
National Security Risks and Refuses to Elaborate,” Tom’s Hardware, July 6, 2024;
Matthew Sparkes, “Multiple Nations Enact Mysterious Export Controls on Quantum
Computers,” New Scientist, July 3, 2023.
                                       259
   387. U.S. Department of Commerce, Department of Commerce Implements Controls
on Quantum Computing and Other Advanced Technologies alongside International
Partners, September 5, 2024, 2–3.
   388. Dorsey & Whitney, LLP, Commerce Department Adopts Sweeping Changes in
U.S. Export Controls, September 12, 2024; U.S. Department of Commerce, Depart-
ment of Commerce Implements Controls on Quantum Computing and Other Advanced
Technologies alongside International Partners, September 5, 2024, 3.
   389. Sam Howell, “The Quest for Qubits,” Center for a New American Security,
May 28, 2024, 22.
   390. Edward Parker, written response to question for the record for U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging
Technologies in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February
1, 2024, 8.
   391. Edward Parker, written response to question for the record for U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging
Technologies in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February
1, 2024, 8.
   392. Edward Parker, written response to question for the record for U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging
Technologies in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February
1, 2024, 2–3.
   393. Edward Parker, written response to question for the record for U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging
Technologies in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February
1, 2024, 2.
   394. Edward Parker, written response to question for the record for U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging
Technologies in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February
1, 2024, 3.
   395. Sam Howell, “The Quest for Qubits,” Center for a New American Security,
May 28, 2024, 22.
   396. Sam Howell, “The Quest for Qubits,” Center for a New American Security,
May 28, 2024, 22.
   397. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, “Implemen-
tation of Additional Sanctions against Russia and Belarus under the Export Admin-
istration Regulations (EAR) and Refinements to Existing Controls,” Federal Register
87:179 (September 16, 2022).
   398. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, “Commerce
Control List Additions and Revisions; Implementation of Controls on Advanced Tech-
nologies Consistent with Controls Implemented,” Federal Register 89:173 (September
6, 2024).
   399. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, “Commerce
Control List Additions and Revisions; Implementation of Controls on Advanced Tech-
nologies Consistent with Controls Implemented,” Federal Register 89:173 (Septem-
ber 6, 2024); Edward Parker, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 165; Adam Zewe, “A
New Way for Quantum Computing Systems to Keep Their Cool,” MIT News Office,
February 21, 2023.
   400. Edward Parker, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Economic
and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 154; David R. Farley and Jun-
ji Urayama, “Survey of the Worldwide Supply Chain of Commodities Needed for a
Quantum Technology Program,” Sandia National Laboratories, September 2022, 15.
   401. David R. Farley and Junji Urayama, “Survey of the Worldwide Supply Chain
of Commodities Needed for a Quantum Technology Program,” Sandia National Lab-
oratories, September 2022, 15.
   402. Bob Sorensen and Tom Sorensen, “Challenges and Opportunities for Securing
a Robust US Quantum Computing Supply Chain,” Hyperion Research, June 2022, 9.
   403. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, “Commerce
Control List Additions and Revisions; Implementation of Controls on Advanced Tech-
nologies Consistent with Controls Implemented,” Federal Register 89:173 (September
6, 2024).
   404. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2023, 1.
                                         260
   405. Office of the U.S. Director of National Intelligence, The Future of Biotech,
2021, 2–3, 5–6.
   406. Doug Irving, “Artificial Intelligence and Biotechnology: Risks and Opportuni-
ties,” RAND Corporation, March 21, 2024.
   407. Eric Schmidt, “We Need to be Ready for Biotech’s ChatGPT Moment,” Time,
April 16, 2024.
   408. Sandra Barbosu, “How Innovative Is China in Biotechnology?” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, August 2024, 3, 5–6; Sunny Cheung, Arran
Hope, and Peter Mattis, “Red Genes: Assessing WuXi AppTec’s Ties to the Party-Ar-
my-State in China,” Jamestown Foundation, February 9, 2024; Rob Carlson and Rik
Wehbring, “Two Worlds Two Bioeconomies: The Impacts of Decoupling U.S.-China
Trade and Technology Transfer,” Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory, 2020, 6.
   409. China Daily, “Bioeconomy Prominent on Growth Agenda,” State Coun-
cil of the People’s Republic of China, May 11, 2022. https://web.archive.org/
web/20241007031535/https://english.www.gov.cn/policies/policywatch/202205/11/
content_WS627b169ec6d02e533532a879.html; State Council of the People’s Republic
of China, “14th Five Year Plan” Bioeconomy Development Plan (“十四五”生物经济
发展规划), May 10, 2022. Translation; Adolfo Arranz, “Betting Big on Biotech,” South
China Morning Post, October 9, 2018.
   410. Sandra Barbosu, “How Innovative Is China in Biotechnology?” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, August 2024, 20–21.
   411. State Council of the People’s Republic of China, “Made in China 2025” Plan
Issued, May 19, 2015. https://web.archive.org/web/20240822193419/https://english.
www.gov.cn/policies/latest_ releases/2015/05/19/content_ 281475110703534.htm;
State Council of the People’s Republic of China, Notice of the State Council on Issuing
“Made in China 2025” (国务院关于印发《中国制造2025》的通知), 2015. https://web.
archive.org/web/20241008023501/https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2015-05/19/
content_9784.htm.
   412. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 1–2; Xu Zhang et al.,
“The Roadmap of Bioeconomy in China,” Engineering Biology 6:4 (November 2022):
71–73; State Council of the People’s Republic of China, 14th Five-Year Plan Bioeco-
nomy Development Plan (“十四五”生物经济发展规划 ), May 10, 2022. Translation.
   413. Anna Puglisi, “China’s Hybrid Economy: What to Do about BGI?” Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, February 2, 2024.
   414. Sandra Barbosu, “How Innovative Is China in Biotechnology?” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, August 2024, 28–29.
   415. Sandra Barbosu, “How Innovative Is China in Biotechnology?” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, August 2024, 3–4, 6; Pharmaceutical Technol-
ogy, “BIOSECURE Act Could Impact US Biopharma Drugs with Half in Clinical-Stage
Development,” June 4, 2024; Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Eco-
nomic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technol-
ogies in U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024,
1–2, 12; Millie Nelson, “WuXi Bio Grabs Larger Piece of the Bio CDMO Pie,” BioPro-
cess International, March 24, 2022; Mark Kazmierczak et al., “China’s Biotechnology
Development: The Role of US and Other Foreign Engagement,” Gryphon Scientific
and Rhodium Group (prepared for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission), February 14, 2019, 16–18, 69.
   416. Sandra Barbosu, “How Innovative Is China in Biotechnology?” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, August 2024, 6.
   417. Bloomberg, “China’s $220 Billion Biotech Initiative Is Struggling to Take Off,”
May 15, 2023.
   418. Bloomberg, “China’s $220 Billion Biotech Initiative Is Struggling to Take Off,”
May 15, 2023.
   419. Bloomberg, “China’s $220 Billion Biotech Initiative Is Struggling to Take Off,”
May 15, 2023.
   420. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 3.
   421. Bloomberg, “China’s $220 Billion Biotech Initiative Is Struggling to Take Off,”
May 15, 2023.
   422. Bloomberg, “China’s $220 Billion Biotech Initiative Is Struggling to Take Off,”
May 15, 2023.
   423. Bloomberg, “China’s $220 Billion Biotech Initiative Is Struggling to Take Off,”
May 15, 2023.
                                         261
   424. Bloomberg, “China’s $220 Billion Biotech Initiative Is Struggling to Take Off,”
May 15, 2023.
   425. Sandra Barbosu, “How Innovative Is China in Biotechnology?” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, August 2024, 5.
   426. Sandra Barbosu, “How Innovative Is China in Biotechnology?” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, August 2024, 22.
   427. Sandra Barbosu, “How Innovative Is China in Biotechnology?” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, August 2024, 20–21.
   428. Brian Buntz, “The Global Biotech Funding Landscape in 2023: U.S. Leads
While Europe and China Make Strides,” Drug Discovery and Development, January
5, 2024.
   429. Sandra Barbosu, “How Innovative Is China in Biotechnology?” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, August 2024, 7–8.
   430. Sandra Barbosu, “How Innovative Is China in Biotechnology?” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, August 2024, 8–9.
   431. Sandra Barbosu, “How Innovative Is China in Biotechnology?” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, August 2024, 8–9.
   432. Sandra Barbosu, “How Innovative Is China in Biotechnology?” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, August 2024, 16–20.
   433. Office of the U.S. Director of National Intelligence, The Future of Biotech,
2021, 7.
   434. Australian Strategic Policy Institute, “Critical Technology Tracker,” April 26,
2024; Global Gene Editing Regulation Tracker, “China: Crops / Food,” October 18,
2023.
   435. BioPharmaGuy, “520 Biotech Contract Manufacturing Companies—World-
wide,” 2024; Patheon Pharma Services, “CROs vs CMOs, and CDMOs: What’s the
Difference between the Three?” August 10, 2023; Niels Graham, “The US Is Rely-
ing More on China for Pharmaceuticals—and Vice Versa,” Atlantic Council, April 20,
2023; Antonio Regalado, “China’s BGI Says it Can Sequence a Genome for Just $100,”
MIT Technology Review, February 26, 2020.
   436. Reuters, “Trade Association Survey Shows 79% of US Biotech Companies Con-
tract with Chinese Firms,” May 8, 2024; Patheon Pharma Services, “CROs vs CMOs,
and CDMOs: What’s the Difference between the Three?” August 10, 2023.
   437. National Human Genome Research Institute, “A Brief Guide to Genomics,”
August 16, 2022.
   438. Boqin Qiang, “Human Genome Research in China,” Springer Nature 82:4,
February 27, 2004.
   439. Science & Technology Daily, “2023 ‘Ten Major Advancements in Chinese Sci-
ence’ Released” (2023年度“中国科学十大进展”发布), February 29, 2024. Translation.
   440. Sandra Barbosu, “How Innovative Is China in Biotechnology?” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, August 2024, 6; Helen K. Brittain, Richard
Scott, and Ellen Thomas, “The Rise of the Genome and Personalised Medicine,” Clin-
ical Medicine, December 2017.
   441. Joby Warrick and Cate Brown, “China’s Quest for Human Genetic Data Spurs
Fears of a DNA Arms Race,” Washington Post, September 21, 2023; National Acad-
emies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, “Chapter 7: Economic and National
Security Risks Pertaining to the Bioeconomy,” in Safeguarding the Bioeconomy, Na-
tional Academies Press, 2020, 296–298.
   442. Joby Warrick and Cate Brown, “China’s Quest for Human Genetic Data Spurs
Fears of a DNA Arms Race,” Washington Post, September 21, 2023.
   443. Bethany Allen-Ebrahimian, “China Makes Genetic Data a National Resource,”
Axios, March 29, 2022.
   444. Kristy Needham and Clare Baldwin, “China’s Gene Giant Harvests Data from
Millions of Women,” Reuters, July 7, 2021.
   445. BGI, “BGI History,” April 5, 2024; Ken Dilanian, “Congress Wants to Ban Chi-
na’s Largest Genomics Firm from Doing Business in the U.S. Here’s Why,” NBC News,
January 25, 2024.
   446. BGI, “The BGI Researchers behind the World’s First Macaque Brain Cortex
Atlas,” August 15, 2023; BGI, “BGI Genomics-Led Team Leverages Whole Genome
Sequencing to Release the First Chinese Population Blood Atlas,” December 4, 2022.
   447. Kristy Needham and Clare Baldwin, “China’s Gene Giant Harvests Data from
Millions of Women,” Reuters, July 7, 2021.
   448. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 6; Reuters, “BGI Ge-
nomics Co Ltd.”; Anna Puglisi and Chryssa Rask, “China, Biotechnology, and BGI:
                                        262
How China’s Hybrid Economy Skews Competition,” Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, May 2024.
   449. BGI, “Select the Region You Want to Visit,” April 2024; BGI, “BGI Offices and
Laboratories,” April 25, 2024; BGI, “BGI Group Helping over 80 Countries for Timely
COVID-19 Detection and Intervention,” January 23, 2024.
   450. Joby Warrick and Cate Brown, “China’s Quest for Human Genetic Data Spurs
Fears of a DNA Arms Race,” Washington Post, September 21, 2023.
   451. Yahoo Finance, “BGI Genomics Co., Ltd. (300676.SZ),” October 14, 2024; Yahoo
Finance, “Illumina, Inc. (ILMN),” October 14, 2024; Anna Puglisi and Chryssa Rask,
“China, Biotechnology, and BGI: How China’s Hybrid Economy Skews Competition,”
Center for Security and Emerging Technology, May 2024, 32–33.
   452. Anna Puglisi, “China’s Hybrid Economy: What to Do about BGI?” Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, February 2, 2024.
   453. Julia Karow, “BGI to Receive $1.5B in ‘Collaborative Funds’ over 10 Years
from China Development Bank,” Genomeweb, January 13, 2010.
   454. Illumina, “China’s Novogene Is a Global Force,” June 14, 2021; Illumina, “NGS
vs Sanger Sequencing,” 2024.
   455. Mark Kazmierczak et al., “China’s Biotechnology Development: The Role of
US and Other Foreign Engagement,” Gryphon Scientific and Rhodium Group (pre-
pared for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission), February 14,
2019, 104; Don Seiffert, “Chinese Biotech Vcanbio Opens First U.S. Subsidiaries in
Natick,” September 13, 2016.
   456. Mark Kazmierczak et al., “China’s Biotechnology Development: The Role of
US and Other Foreign Engagement,” Gryphon Scientific and Rhodium Group (pre-
pared for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission), February 14,
2019, 104; Don Seiffert, “Chinese Biotech Vcanbio Opens First U.S. Subsidiaries in
Natick,” September 13, 2016.
   457. Novogene, “Novogene America Launches a New Single-Cell Lab in San Jose,
Based on Chromium Platform Powered by 10x Genomics,” 2022.
   458. Karen Hao and Sha Hua, “The U.S. Is Turning Away from Its Biggest Scien-
tific Partner at a Precarious Time,” Wall Street Journal, August 16, 2023.
   459. Christina Jewett, “Chinese Company under Congressional Scrutiny Makes
Key U.S. Drugs,” New York Times, April 15, 2024; U.S. Department of Defense, Enti-
ties Identified as Chinese Military Companies Operating in the United States in Ac-
cordance with Section 1260H of the William M. (“Mac”) Thornberry National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283); Kirsty Needham and
Clare Baldwin, “China’s Gene Giant Harvests Data from Millions of Women,” Reuters,
July 7, 2021; Christina Larson, “Inside China’s Genome Factory,” MIT Technology
Review, February 11, 2013.
   460. BGI Americas, “History,” 2015; Christina Larson, “Inside China’s Genome Fac-
tory,” MIT Technology Review, February 11, 2013.
   461. Jerry Dunleavy, “China’s COVID-19 Test Supplier in US Is Chinese Military
Company, Pentagon Says,” Washington Examiner, October 7, 2022.
   462. Joby Warrick and Cate Brown, “China’s Quest for Human Genetic Data Spurs
Fears of a DNA Arms Race,” Washington Post, October 19, 2023.
   463. University of California, Davis, “UC Davis and BGI Complete Master Agree-
ment to Create BGI@UC Davis Genome Facility,” February 17, 2017; PR Newswire,
“BGI and the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Launch the 1,000 Rare Diseases
Project to Advance Gene Discovery,” June 18, 2012.
   464. WuXi Biologics, “Services & Solutions Information Downloads,” October 9,
2024; WuXi AppTech, “About Us”; Suzanne Hodsden, “WuXi PharmaTech Acquires
XenoBiotic, Expands Operations in the U.S.,” Outsouced Pharma, October 3, 2024;
WuXi AppTec, “Our History,” 2020.
   465. James Mulvenon, “The WuXi Group: The National Security Risks Associat-
ed with Its Government and Military Connections, Data Privacy Issues, and Corpo-
rate Reach,” April 19, 2024, 3–6; WuXi AppTech, “Our History,” 2024; WuXi AppTec,
“WuXi AppTec Completes Acquisition of OXGENE to Further Strengthen Cell and
Gene Therapy Service Offerings for Global Customers,” March 1, 2021; WuXi AppTec,
“WuXi STA Completes Acquisition of Bristol Myers Squibb Manufacturing Facility in
Couvet, Switzerland,” August 3, 2021.
   466. Christina Jewett, “Chinese Company under Congressional Scrutiny Makes
Key U.S. Drugs,” New York Times, April 15, 2024; Julian E. Barnes, “U.S. Warns of
Efforts by China to Collect Genetic Data,” New York Times, October 22, 2021.
   467. Christina Jewett, “Chinese Company under Congressional Scrutiny Makes
Key U.S. Drugs,” New York Times, April 15, 2024.
   468. Christina Jewett, “Chinese Company Under Congressional Scrutiny Makes
Key U.S. Drugs,” New York Times, April 15, 2024; Fraiser Kansteiner, “Intelligence
                                         263
Officials Warned Lawmakers WuXi AppTec Furnished China with Client’s Intellectu-
al Property: Reuters,” Fierce Pharma, March 28, 2024.
  469. Christina Jewett, “Chinese Company under Congressional Scrutiny Makes
Key U.S. Drugs,” New York Times, April 15, 2024.
  470. Kirsty Needham and Andrew Silver, “Staff at Drugmaker under U.S. Scrutiny
Worked with Chinese Military Scientists,” Reuters, June 6, 2024.
  471. C. Simone Fishburn, “Anti-China Bills Portend Massive Blow to Biotech: Bio-
Century Survey,” Biocentury, March 21, 2024.
  472. Biotechnology Innovation Organization, “BIO Survey Reveals Dependence on
Chinese Biomanufacturing, Indicating Up to 8 Years Needed to Change Partners,”
May 9, 2024.
  473. Erin R. Fox and Michael Ganio, “Drug Shortages Statistics,” American Soci-
ety of Health-System Pharmacists, 2024; Christina Jewett, “Chinese Company under
Congressional Scrutiny Makes Key U.S. Drugs,” New York Times, April 15, 2024.
  474. U.S. House of Representatives Select Committee on the Strategic Competition
between the United States and the Chinese Communist Party, Letter to Admin to
Investigate Chinese Biotech Company, WuXi AppTec, February 12, 2024, 3.
  475. Christina Jewett, “Chinese Company under Congressional Scrutiny Makes
Key U.S. Drugs,” New York Times, April 15, 2024; Julian E. Barnes, “U.S. Warns of
Efforts by China to Collect Genetic Data,” New York Times, October 22, 2021.
  476. S.2226 - National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2024, July 27,
2023.
  477. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry Security, “Addition of Cer-
tain Entities to the Entity List; Revision of Existing Entries on the Entity List,” Fed-
eral Register 85:141 (July 22, 2020); U.S. Department of Defense, Entities Identified
as Chinese Military Companies Operating in the United States in Accordance with
Section 1260H of the William M. (“Mac”) Thornberry National Defense Authorization
Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283).
  478. Karen Freifeld, “US Bill to Restrict WuXi AppTec, Chinese Biotechs Revised
to Give More Time to Cut Ties,” Reuters, May 10, 2024; Jamie Smyth and Demetri
Sevastopulo, “Chinese Genetics Company Targets US despite Political Tensions,” Fi-
nancial Times, April 18, 2023.
  479. Jamie Smyth and Demetri Sevastopulo, “Chinese Genetics Company Targets
US despite Political Tensions,” Financial Times, April 18, 2023.
  480. Jamie Smyth and Demetri Sevastopulo, “Chinese Genetics Company Targets
US despite Political Tensions,” Financial Times, April 18, 2023.
  481. U.S. House of Representatives Select Committee on the Strategic Competition
between the United States and the Chinese Communist Party, Letter to DoD on Hid-
den BGI Subsidiary, Innomics, Operating in the US, Call on Pentagon to List Chinese
Biotech Firms as “Chinese Military Companies,” April 1, 2024.
  482. Mark Kazmierczak et al., “China’s Biotechnology Development: The Role of
US and Other Foreign Engagement,” Gryphon Scientific and Rhodium Group (pre-
pared for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission), February 14,
2019, 105; Don Seiffert, “Chinese Biotech Vcanbio Opens First U.S. Subsidiaries in
Natick,” September 13, 2016.
  483. Mark Kazmierczak et al., “China’s Biotechnology Development: The Role of
US and Other Foreign Engagement,” Gryphon Scientific and Rhodium Group (pre-
pared for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission), February 14,
2019, 105.
  484. Kevin Dong et al. “China’s Food Security: Key Challenges and Emerging Poli-
cy Responses,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, March 15, 2024.
  485. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 8; Kelly P. Nelson
and Keith Fuglie, “Investment in U.S. Public Agricultural Research and Development
Has Fallen by a Third over Past Two Decades, Lags Major Trade Competitors,” U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, May 2022.
  486. Jian-Kang Zhu, “The Future of Gene-Edited Crops in China,” National Sci-
ence Review 9:4 (April 2022); Australian Strategic Policy Institute, “Critical Technol-
ogy Tracker,” April 26, 2024.
  487. Global Gene Editing Regulation Tracker, “China: Crops / Food,” October 18,
2023; Jian-Kang Zhu, “The Future of Gene-Edited Crops in China,” National Science
Review 9:4 (April 2022): 1.
  488. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 8.
                                      264
  489. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 9.
  490. Carol Zhong and Julie Zhu, “Bank of China Main Backer as ChemChina Rais-
es $20 billion for Syngenta Deal,” Reuters, May 25, 2017.
  491. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 9.
  492. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 9.
  493. Allison Weber, “The Big Six to the Big Four: The Rise of the Seed and Agro-
Chemical Oligopoly,” UC Berkley Policy Review, January 5, 2022; Hope Shand, “The
Big Six: A Profile of Corporate Power in Seeds, Agrochemicals & Biotech,” Heritage
Farm Companion, June 2012.
  494. Allison Weber, “The Big Six to the Big Four: The Rise of the Seed and Agro-
Chemical Oligopoly,” UC Berkley Policy Review, January 5, 2022; Hope Shand, “The
Big Six: A Profile of Corporate Power in Seeds, Agrochemicals & Biotech,” Heritage
Farm Companion, June 2012.
  495. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 9–10.
  496. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 9.
  497. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 10.
  498. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 10.
  499. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, 2021 Report to Congress on China’s
WTO Compliance, February 2022, 53–54.
  500. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, 2021 Report to Congress on China’s
WTO Compliance, February 2022, 54.
  501. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 10.
  502. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 10.
  503. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 9; Renato Panichi
and Paulina Grabowiec, “Swiss Agrichemical Company Syngenta Upgraded to ‘BB-
B/A-2’ On Stronger Parental Support; Outlook Stable,” S&P Global, November 10,
2021.
  504. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2023, 9; Syngenta, “Syn-
genta Group Reports $32.2 Billion Sales and $4.6 Billion EBITDA in 2023,” March
29, 2024.
  505. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2023, 9.
  506. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2023, 9.
  507. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2023, 7.
  508. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2023, 7.
  509. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2023, 7.
                                       265
  510. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2023, 7.
  511. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2023, 7.
  512. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2023, 7; World Economic
Forum, “BioMap”; BioMap, “Home: Our Approach.”
  513. U.S. National Counterintelligence and Security Center, China’s Collection of
Genomic and Other Healthcare Date from America: Risks to Privacy and U.S. Eco-
nomic and National Security, February 2021, 1.
  514. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2023, 7.
  515. Michelle Rozo, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2023, 8.
  516. Jeb Nadaner, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 3; Craig Singleton,
“Beijing’s Power Play,” Foundation for Defense of Democracies, October 23, 2023.
  517. Grand View Research, “U.S. Battery Market Size & Trends,” 2023.
  518. Gracelin Baskaran, “What China’s Ban on Rare Earths Processing Technology
Exports Means,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, January 8, 2024;
Jackie Northam, “China Dominates the EV Battery Industry. Can the Rest of the
World Catch Up?” NPR, July 22, 2023.
  519. Jack Aylmer, “An Electric Vehicle Future Needs Batteries. China Is Dominat-
ing,” Straight Arrow News, November 17, 2023.
  520. Akshat Rathi, “How China Left the World Far Behind in the Battery Race,”
Bloomberg NEF, October 12, 2023.
  521. Jeb Nadaner, “Building China-Resistant Battery Supply Chains,” Govini;
Jackie Northam, “Ford Plans to Make EV Batteries in U.S. with Chinese Company
That Developed the Tech,” National Public Radio, August 8, 2023; Agnes Chang and
Keith Bradsher, “Can the World Make an Electric Car Battery without China?” New
York Times, May 16, 2023.
  522. Joseph Webster, “What US Tariffs on Chinese Batteries Mean for Decarbon-
ization—and Taiwan,” Atlantic Council, May 13, 2024; U.S. Department of Commerce,
Census Bureau, USA Trade Online.
  523. Phoebe Sedgman, Jinshan Hong, and Linda Lew, “China’s Stranglehold on EV
Supply Chain Will Be Tough to Break,” Bloomberg, September 27, 2023.
  524. China’s Ministry of Industrial Information and Security, Ministry of Science
and Technology, and Ministry of Natural Resources, “14th Five-Year Plan” Raw Ma-
terials Industry Development Plan (“十四五”原材料工业发展规划), December 29,
2021. https://web.archive.org/web/20240530220929/https://wap.miit.gov.cn/zwgk/
zcwj/wjfb/tz/art/2021/art_ 2960538d19e34c66a5eb8d01b74cbb20.html.
  525. Jackie Northam, “China Dominates the EV Battery Industry. Can the Rest
of the World Catch Up?” NPR, July 22, 2023; Edward White, “China Bans Export
of Rare Earth Processing Technologies,” Financial Times, December 21, 2023; U.S.
Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory, Rare Earth Ele-
ments—A Subset of Critical Minerals.
  526. Gracelin Baskaran, “What China’s Ban on Rare Earths Processing Technology
Exports Means,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, January 8, 2024;
Jackie Northam, “China Dominates the EV Battery Industry. Can the Rest of the
World Catch Up?” NPR, July 22, 2023.
  527. Congressional-Executive Commission on China, Hearing on Cobalt to Cars:
How China Exploits Child and Forced Labor in the Congo, November 14, 2023; Yu-
dith Ho and Eko Listiyorini, “Chinese Companies Are Flocking to Indonesia for Its
Nickel,” Bloomberg, December 15, 2022; Reuters, “China’s Huayou Buys Lithium
Mine in Zimbabwe for $422 Mln,” December 22, 2021.
  528. Jackie Northam, “China Dominates the EV Battery Industry. Can the Rest of
the World Catch Up?” NPR, July 22, 2023.
  529. Yudith Ho and Eko Listiyorini, “Chinese Companies Are Flocking to Indonesia
for Its Nickel,” Bloomberg, December 1, 2022; Reuters, “China’s Huayou Buys Lithium
Mine in Zimbabwe for $422 Mln,” December 22, 2021; Congressional-Executive Com-
                                         266
mission on China, Hearing on Cobalt to Cars: How China Exploits Child and Forced
Labor in the Congo, November 14, 2023.
   530. Polly Bindman, “Weekly Data: China Seeks to Extend Its Critical Minerals
Dominance with Overseas Investment Surge,” Energy Monitor, August 21, 2023.
   531. Polly Bindman, “Weekly Data: China Seeks to Extend Its Critical Minerals
Dominance with Overseas Investment Surge,” Energy Monitor, August 21, 2023.
   532. International Energy Agency, “14th FYP for Raw Material Industry Devel-
opment,” November 7, 2022. https://www.iea.org/policies/14702-14th-fyp-for-raw-
material-industry-development; China’s Ministry of Industrial Information and Se-
curity, Ministry of Science and Technology, and Ministry of Natural Resources, “14th
Five-Year Plan” Raw Materials Industry Development Plan (“十四五”原材料工业发
展规划), December 29, 2021. https://web.archive.org/web/20240530220929/https://
wap.miit.gov.cn/zwgk/zcwj/wjfb/tz/art/2021/art_ 2960538d19e34c66a5eb8d01b74c
bb20.html.
   533. Gracelin Baskaran, “What China’s Ban on Rare Earths Processing Technology
Exports Means,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, January 8, 2024;
Jackie Northam, “China Dominates the EV Battery Industry. Can the Rest of the
World Catch Up?” NPR, July 22, 2023.
   534. Farai Mutsaka, “A Chinese Mining Company Has Opened a Giant Lithium
Processing Plant in Zimbabwe,” Associated Press, July 5, 2023.
   535. Rodrigo Castillo and Caitlin Purdy, “China’s Role in Supplying Critical Miner-
als for the Global Energy Transition,” Brookings Institution, July 2022.
   536. Rodrigo Castillo and Caitlin Purdy, “China’s Role in Supplying Critical Miner-
als for the Global Energy Transition,” Brookings Institution, July 2022.
   537. Kenji Kawase, “China Gives EV Sector Billions of Yuan in Subsidies,” Nikkei
Asia, September 21, 2023.
   538. European Commission, Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/1866
of 3 July 2024 imposing a provisional countervailing duty on imports of new battery
electric vehicles designed for the transport of persons originating in the People’s Re-
public of China, July 3, 2024.
   539. European Commission, Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/1866
of 3 July 2024 imposing a provisional countervailing duty on imports of new battery
electric vehicles designed for the transport of persons originating in the People’s Re-
public of China, July 3, 2024; Karen M. Sutter, “ ‘Made in China 2025’ Industrial Pol-
icies: Issues for Congress,” Congressional Research Service IF10964, March 10, 2023.
   540. European Commission, Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/1866
of 3 July 2024 imposing a provisional countervailing duty on imports of new battery
electric vehicles designed for the transport of persons originating in the People’s Re-
public of China, July 3, 2024.
   541. Evelyn Cheng, “China Has Spent at Least $230 Billion to Build Its EV In-
dustry, New Study Finds,” CNBC, June 21, 2024; Scott Kennedy, “The Chinese EV
Dilemma: Subsidized Yet Striking,” Center for Strategic and International Studies,
June 28, 2024.
   542. Kenji Kawase, “China Gives EV Sector Billions of Yuan in Subsidies,” Nikkei
Asia, September 21, 2023.
   543. Contemporary Amperex Technology Co., Ltd., “CATL Tops Global EV Battery
Market for the Seven Consecutive Year,” February 24, 2024; Kenji Kawase, “China
Gives EV Sector Billions of Yuan in Subsidies,” Nikkei Asia, September 21, 2023.
   544. Agnes Chang and Keith Bradsher, “Can the World Make an Electric Car Bat-
tery without China?” New York Times, May 16, 2023.
   545. Peter Johnson, “CATL Establishes Aviation Unit as It Moves Closer to Elec-
tric Airplane Development,” Electrek, July 21, 2023.
   546. Peter Johnson, “CATL Establishes Aviation Unit as It Moves Closer to Elec-
tric Airplane Development,” Electrek, July 21, 2023.
   547. Peter Johnson, “CATL Establishes Aviation Unit as It Moves Closer to Elec-
tric Airplane Development,” Electrek, July 21, 2023.
   548. Jill Shen, “China’s GAC Declares a Breakthrough in All-Solid-State Battery
Development,” Technode, April 16, 2024.
   549. Phoebe Sedgman, Jinshan Hong, and Linda Lew, “China’s Stranglehold on EV
Supply Chain Will Be Tough to Break,” Bloomberg, September 27, 2023.
   550. Fortune Business Insights, “Electric Vehicle Market Size, Share & Covid-19
Impact Analysis,” April 22, 2024.
   551. Daniel Ren, “Who Powers the World’s EVs? China Has 6 of the Top 10 EV
Battery Makers with 60 Per Cent Market Share, Led by CATL and Warren Buf-
fett-Backed BYD,” South China Morning Post, January 6, 2023.
   552. Paolo Gerbaudo, “The Electric Vehicle Developmental State,” Phenomenal
World, April 11, 2024; Rosa De Acosta, “How Tesla and Its Chinese Competitor Com-
                                        267
pare, in 4 Charts,” CNN, April 3, 2024; Andy Home, “US Looks to Shut China Out
of Its Battery Supply Chain,” Reuters, December 5, 2023; Zeyi Yang, “How Did China
Come to Dominate the World of Electric Cars?” MIT Technology Review, February
21, 2023.
   553. Agnes Chang and Keith Bradsher, “Can the World Make an Electric Car Bat-
tery without China?” New York Times, May 16, 2023.
   554. Phoebe Sedgman, Jinshan Hong, and Linda Lew, “China’s Stranglehold on EV
Supply Chain Will Be Tough to Break,” Bloomberg, September 27, 2023.
   555. Phoebe Sedgman, Jinshan Hong, and Linda Lew, “China’s Stranglehold on EV
Supply Chain Will Be Tough to Break,” Bloomberg, September 27, 2023.
   556. Phoebe Sedgman, Jinshan Hong, and Linda Lew, “China’s Stranglehold on EV
Supply Chain Will Be Tough to Break,” Bloomberg, September 27, 2023.
   557. Phoebe Sedgman, Jinshan Hong, and Linda Lew, “China’s Stranglehold on EV
Supply Chain Will Be Tough to Break,” Bloomberg, September 27, 2023.
   558. Nikkei, “Tesla Relies on China for 40% of Battery Supply Chain: Analysis,”
August 8, 2023.
   559. Stephen Ezell, “How Innovative Is China in the Electric Vehicle and Battery
Industries?” Information Technology & Innovation Foundation, July 29, 2024; Andrew
Evers, “How BYD Grew from Battery Maker to Electric Vehicle Juggernaut, Overtak-
ing Tesla,” CNBC, March 26, 2024.
   560. Paolo Gerbaudo, “The Electric Vehicle Developmental State,” Phenomenal
World, April 11, 2024.
   561. Economic Times, “China’s BYD Launches World’s Biggest Battery Factory,”
June 28, 2018; Chris Randall, “BYD to Build 20 GWh Battery Plant in China,” Elec-
trive, November 24, 2022.
   562. Benchmark Source, “BYD Secures Lithium Discount after Buying Stake in
Chinese Lithium Miner,” March 25, 2022; Joe McDonald, “Threatened by Shortages,
Electric Car Makers Race for Supplies of Lithium for Batteries,” Associated Press,
June 27, 2023.
   563. Tsvetana Paraskova, “China Heavily Subsidized BYD to Expand Its EV Mar-
ket Share,” OILPRICE.com, April 10, 2024; Frank Bickenbach et al., “Foul Play? On
the Level and Extent of Industrial Subsidies in China” (Foulspiel? Zu Höhe und
Umfang der Industriesubventionen in China), Kiel Institut für Weltwirtschaft, April
2024. Translation. www.ifw-kiel.de/fileadmin/Dateiverwaltung/IfW-Publications/fis-
import/3efc594b-3e1c-41e4-b6b0-150e947a45db-KBP173dt.pdf.
   564. Phate Zhang, “BYD’s Sodium Battery Joint Venture Formed,” CnEVPost, May
9, 2024; Sorin-Andrei Dojan, “China’s BYD to Build $1.3bn Plant in Indonesia,” In-
vestment Monitor, January 18, 2024; Reuters, “BYD, KG Mobility in Talks on Battery
Joint Venture in South Korea—Source,” August 23, 2023; Benchmark Source, “BYD
Secures Lithium Discount after Buying Stake in Chinese Lithium Miner,” March
25, 2022; Chris Randall, “BYD to Build 20 GWh Battery Plant in China,” Electrive,
November 24, 2022; Tom Daly, “Worried about Nickel Supply, China Battery Maker
BYD Welcomes JV Discussions,” Reuters, April 11, 2019.
   565. Michael Wayland, “Chinese Automakers Expected to Achieve 33% Global Mar-
ket Share by 2030,” CNBC, June 27, 2024.
   566. Autovista24, “BYD Dominates Chinese EV Market in June,” August 13, 2024;
Rosa De Acosta, “How Tesla and Its Chinese Competitor Compare, in 4 Charts,” CNN,
April 3, 2024; Edward White and Peter Campbell, “China’s Electric Vehicle Domi-
nance Presents a Challenge to the West,” Financial Times, January 5, 2024.
   567. Jill Shen, “BYD, Geely Post 2023 EV Sales Records on the Back of Overseas
Demand,” Technode, January 2, 2024; Geely, “2023 Annual Sales by Geely Holding
Brands Rise 20% to 2.79m Units,” January 11, 2024.
   568. Marklines, “SAIC: 3.5M NEV Sales by 2025, Launching 14 New Smart EV
Models Oversea,” March 25, 2024; SAIC, “SAIC Motor Sells over 5 Million Vehicles
in 2023,” January 8, 2024.
   569. Promit Mukherjee and Akash Sriram, “Canada to Impose 100% Tariff on Chi-
nese EVs, Including Teslas,” Reuters, August 27, 2024; William Alan Reinsch and
Jack Whitney, “Unpacking the European Union’s Provisional Tariff Hikes on Chinese
Electric Vehicles,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, June 21, 2024.
   570. Reuters, “Brazil Imports of Chinese Electric Vehicles Surge ahead of New Tar-
iff,” April 5, 2024.
   571. Xiaohan Zhang, “China’s Booming Energy Storage: A Policy-Driven and High-
ly Concentrated Market,” APCO, November 14, 2023.
   572. Xiaohan Zhang, “China’s Booming Energy Storage: A Policy-Driven and High-
ly Concentrated Market,” APCO, November 14, 2023.
   573. Yi Wu, “China’s Energy Storage Sector: Policies and Investment Opportuni-
ties,” China Briefing, July 2022.
                                        268
   574. Andy Colthorpe, “US BESS Installations ‘Surged’ in 2023 with 96% Increase
in Cumulative Capacity, ACP Says,” Energy Storage, March 18, 2024.
   575. U.S. Department of Commerce, Census Bureau, USA Trade Online database;
Garrett Hering and Anna Duquiatan, “US Lithium-Ion Battery Imports, Mostly from
China, Skyrocket in 2022,” S&P Global, February 28, 2023.
   576. U.S. Department of Commerce, Census Bureau, USA Trade Online database;
Garrett Hering and Anna Duquiatan, “US Lithium-Ion Battery Imports, Mostly from
China, Skyrocket in 2022,” S&P Global, February 28, 2023.
   577. U.S. Energy Information Administration, Electricity Explained: Energy Stor-
age for Electricity Generation, August 28, 2023; Garrett Hering and Anna Duquiatan,
“US Lithium-Ion Battery Imports, Mostly from China, Skyrocket in 2022,” S&P Glob-
al, February 28, 2023.
   578. Andy Colthorpe, “US BESS Installations ‘Surged’ in 2023 with 96% Increase
in Cumulative Capacity, ACP Says,” Energy Storage News, March 18, 2024; Craig
Singleton, “Beijing’s Power Play,” Foundation for Defense of Democracies, October 23,
2023.
   579. Craig Singleton, “Beijing’s Power Play,” Foundation for Defense of Democra-
cies, October 23, 2023.
   580. Craig Singleton, “Beijing’s Power Play,” Foundation for Defense of Democra-
cies, October 23, 2023.
   581. Jennifer Hiller, “Giant Batteries Helped the U.S. Power Grid Eke through
Summer,” Wall Street Journal, September 26, 2023.
   582. Kassia Micek and Justine Coyne, “US Battery Storage: 97% of US Capacity
Additions in Q2 in ERCOT, WECC, CAISO,” S&P Global, August 13, 2024.
   583. Jennifer Hiller, “Giant Batteries Helped the U.S. Power Grid Eke through
Summer,” Wall Street Journal, September 26, 2023.
   584. Jennifer Hiller, “Giant Batteries Helped the U.S. Power Grid Eke through
Summer,” Wall Street Journal, September 26, 2023; Craig Singleton, “Beijing’s Power
Play,” Foundation for Defense of Democracies, October 23, 2023.
   585. Craig Singleton, “Beijing’s Power Play,” Foundation for Defense of Democra-
cies, October 23, 2023; CATL, “CATL and HGP Establish Partnership to Facilitate Up
to 5 GWh of Battery Energy Storage Systems,” March 27, 2023.
   586. Craig Singleton, “Beijing’s Power Play,” Foundation for Defense of Democra-
cies, October 23, 2023.
   587. Craig Singleton, “Beijing’s Power Play,” Foundation for Defense of Democra-
cies, October 23, 2023; Tik Root, “EV Charger Hacking Poses a ‘Catastrophic’ Risk,”
Wired, July 5, 2023; Alex Wright, “Battery Energy Storage Systems Can Make Com-
panies More Sustainable—and More Vulnerable to Hackers,” Risk & Insurance, May
29, 2023; Jay Johnson et al., “Review of Electric Vehicle Charger Cybersecurity Vul-
nerabilities, Potential Impacts, and Defenses,” Sandia National Laboratories, May 26,
2022; Tony Nasr et al., “Power Jacking Your Station: In-Depth Security Analysis of
Electric Vehicle Charging Station Management Systems,” Computers & Security 112
(January 2022).
   588. Craig Singleton, “Beijing’s Power Play,” Foundation for Defense of Democra-
cies, October 23, 2023.
   589. Alex Wright, “Battery Energy Storage Systems Can Make Companies More
Sustainable—and More Vulnerable to Hackers,” Risk & Insurance, May 29, 2023.
   590. Craig Singleton, “Beijing’s Power Play,” Foundation for Defense of Democra-
cies, October 23, 2023.
   591. Craig Singleton, “Beijing’s Power Play,” Foundation for Defense of Democra-
cies, October 23, 2023; Jonathan Greig, “Indian Energy Company Tata Power An-
nounces Cyberattack Affecting IT Infrastructure,” Record, October 13, 2022; Global
Data “Top 10 Power Plant Owners in India by Capacity.”
   592. Craig Singleton, “Beijing’s Power Play,” Foundation for Defense of Democra-
cies, October 23, 2023.
   593. Alex Wright, “Battery Energy Storage Systems Can Make Companies More
Sustainable—and More Vulnerable to Hackers,” Risk & Insurance, May 29, 2023.
   594. Jeb Nadaner, oral testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China Economic
and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 237; Alex Wright, “Battery En-
ergy Storage Systems Can Make Companies More Sustainable—and More Vulnerable
to Hackers,” Risk and Insurance, May 29, 2023.
   595. Joe Weiss, “The U.S. Electric Industry Is Not Responding to Cyber-Vulnerable
Chinese Equipment,” Control, February 29, 2024.
   596. Joe Weiss, “The U.S. Electric Industry Is Not Responding to Cyber-Vulnerable
Chinese Equipment,” Control, February 29, 2024.
                                        269
   597. Joe Weiss, “The U.S. Electric Industry Is Not Responding to Cyber-Vulnerable
Chinese Equipment,” Control, February 29, 2024.
   598. Jeb Nadaner, “Building China-Resistant Battery Supply Chains,” Govini,
March 14, 2024.
   599. Jeb Nadaner, written testimony for the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in U.S.-China
Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 3.
   600. Michael Martine, “Exclusive: Duke Energy to Remove Chinese Battery Giant
CATL from Marine Corps Base,” Reuters, February 9, 2024.
   601. Michael Martine, “Duke Energy Disconnects CATL Batteries from Marine
Corps Base over Security Concerns,” Reuters, December 7, 2023.
   602. Office of U.S. Senator Ted Cruz, “Sens. Cruz, Rubio, Colleagues Warn DOD of
National Security Risks for Installing Technology Produced by CCP-Linked Compa-
nies on American Military Bases,” December 12, 2023.
   603. Michael Martine, “Exclusive: Duke Energy to Remove Chinese Battery Giant
CATL from Marine Corps Base,” Reuters, February 9, 2024.
   604. White House, Treasury, DOE Release Proposed Guidance to Strengthen Do-
mestic Supply Chains for Batteries and Electric Vehicles, Ensure the U.S. Leads the
Clean Vehicle Future, December 1, 2023.
   605. White House, FACT SHEET: President Biden Takes Action to Protect Ameri-
can Workers and Businesses from China’s Unfair Trade Practices, May 14, 2024.
   606. Nikkei Asia, “CATL Says Ford Project on Track despite New U.S. Battery
Rules,” December 7, 2023; Reuters, “US Lawmakers Demand Documents on Ford
Battery Partnership with CATL,” September 27, 2023.
   607. Bec Crew, “Pursuit of Better Batteries Underpins China’s Lead in Energy
Research,” Nature, September 24, 2021.
   608. Ilene Wolff and Alan Patterson, “Ford Walks Fine Line as It Builds Gigafacto-
ry—with CATL,” EE Times, November 21, 2023.
   609. Nikkei Asia, “CATL Says Ford Project on Track despite New U.S. Battery
Rules,” December 7, 2023; Reuters, “US Lawmakers Demand Documents on Ford
Battery Partnership with CATL,” September 27, 2023; Ernest Scheyder and Steph-
anie Kelly, “CERAWEEK-U.S. Senator Joe Manchin Blasts Ford’s Battery Deal with
China’s CATL,” Reuters, March 10, 2023.
   610. Nikkei Asia, “CATL Says Ford Project on Track despite New U.S. Battery
Rules,” December 7, 2023; Reuters, “US Lawmakers Demand Documents on Ford
Battery Partnership with CATL,” September 27, 2023; Ernest Scheyder and Steph-
anie Kelly, “CERAWEEK-U.S. Senator Joe Manchin Blasts Ford’s Battery Deal with
China’s CATL,” Reuters, March 10, 2023.
   611. David Shepardson, “US FCC Chair Says China’s Quectel, Fibocom May Pose
National Security Risks,” Reuters, September 6, 2023; U.S. House of Representatives
Select Committee on the Strategic Competition between the United States and the
Chinese Communist Party, Letter to FCC Chair on Chinese Internet Connectivity
Modules, August 8, 2023.
   612. David Shepardson, “US FCC Chair Says China’s Quectel, Fibocom May Pose
National Security Risks,” Reuters, September 6, 2023; Federal Communications Com-
mission, Prohibition on Authorization of “Covered Equipment,” February 6, 2023.
   613. David Shepardson, “US FCC Chair Says China’s Quectel, Fibocom May Pose
National Security Risks,” Reuters, September 6, 2023; U.S. House of Representatives
Select Committee on the Strategic Competition between the United States and the
Chinese Communist Party, Letter to FCC Chair on Chinese Internet Connectivity
Modules, August 8, 2023.
   614. John Lee, “The Connection of Everything: China and the Internet of Things,”
Mercator Institute for China Studies, June 24, 2021.
   615. Counterpoint Research, “Global Cellular IOT Module Market Shows Early
Signs of Recovery,” June 24, 2024; Charlie Parton, “Chinese Cellular IoT technology:
An Analysis Examining Two Companies,” OODALOOP, January 24, 2023; Counter-
point Research, “Global Cellular IoT Module Shipments Grew 20% YoY in Q2 2022,”
September 20, 2022.
   616. David Shepardson, “US FCC Chair Says China’s Quectel, Fibocom May Pose
National Security Risks,” Reuters, September 6, 2023; Debra Jordan, “Letter to Alan
F. Estevez, Under Secretary of the Bureau of Industry and Security,” Federal Com-
munications Commission, September 1, 2023.
   617. Jordan Robertson, “Probing a $69,000 Chinese Electric Vehicle for Clues on
Spying,” Bloomberg, May 15, 2024; Tik Root, “EV Charger Hacking Poses a ‘Cata-
strophic’ Risk,” Wired, July 5, 2023.
   618. U.S. Department of Commerce, Citing National Security Concerns, Biden-Har-
ris Administration Announces Inquiry into Connected Vehicles, February 29, 2024.
                                       270
   619. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Commerce
Announces Proposed Rule to Secure Connected Vehicle Supply Chains from Foreign
Adversary Threats, September 23, 2024.
   620. Ma Ying, “Preliminary Understanding of Accelerating the Supply of New
Quality Combat Capabilities” (对加快新质战斗力供给的初步认识), China Military On-
line, May 2, 2024. https://web.archive.org/web/20240502035439/http://www.81.cn/
szb_ 223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2024-05-02&paperNumb
er=03&articleid=930341; Jacob Stokes, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Current and Emerging Technologies in
U.S.-China Economic and National Security Competition, February 1, 2024, 3; Darrell
M. West and John R. Allen, “How Artificial Intelligence Is Transforming the World,”
Brookings Institution, April 24, 2018.
   621. William Alan Reinsch, Matthew Schleich, and Thibault Denamiel, “Insight
into the U.S. Semiconductor Export Controls Update,” Center for Strategic and Inter-
national Studies, October 20, 2023.
   622. Edward Parker, “Commercial and Military Applications and Timelines for
Quantum Technology,” RAND Corporation, 2021, v, 3; Center for Strategic and In-
ternational Studies, “Is China a Leader in Quantum Technologies?” August 15, 2023.
   623. Sam Howell, “To Restrict, or Not to Restrict, That Is the Quantum Question,”
Lawfare, May 1, 2023.
   624. Sam Howell, “To Restrict, or Not to Restrict, That Is the Quantum Question,”
Lawfare, May 1, 2023.
   625. Phoebe Sedgman, Jinshan Hong, and Linda Lew, “China’s Stranglehold on EV
Supply Chain Will Be Tough to Break,” Bloomberg, September 27, 2023.
   626. Craig Singleton, “Beijing’s Power Play,” Foundation for Defense of Democra-
cies, October 23, 2023.
