                            PART III
        COMPETITION AND CONFLICT
  CHAPTER 5: CHINA AND THE MIDDLE EAST
Abstract
   The Middle East is a region of strategic importance to China due
to its energy resources, location astride key trade routes, and pos-
sible receptivity to Chinese efforts to construct an alternative, illib-
eral world order. As China has deepened its trade and investment
interests in the Middle East over the past decade, it has also built
a variety of diplomatic partnerships and sought to present itself as
a neutral arbiter of regional disputes while expanding its military
activity in the region. Chinese engagement with the Middle East
is selective and transactional, focused on advancing its own inter-
ests; Beijing appears to have little desire to play a significant role
in advancing regional security or to meaningfully contribute to a
resolution of ongoing disputes, including the recent Israel-Hamas
war. Instead, China appears content for the moment to free-ride on
the U.S. and allied regional security infrastructure—including, most
recently, the defense of maritime shipping from Houthi attacks—
while blaming the United States for promoting instability. China
also works to undermine U.S. ties with key Middle Eastern partners
while supporting adversarial countries like Iran. Chinese strategists
likely also assess that the turmoil in the Middle East deflects a por-
tion of U.S. attention and resources away from the Indo-Pacific. In
the short run, China benefits from its relationships in the Middle
East focused on energy trade and securing infrastructure contracts
for its state-owned enterprises. In the long term, Beijing aims to
expand market share for renewable energy and high-value exports,
gain supporters in its bid for global leadership, and potentially es-
tablish new outposts capable of supporting its military for increased
power projection. China’s involvement in the Middle East thus pres-
ents U.S. policymakers with an array of economic, normative, and
geopolitical challenges.
Key Findings
  • China’s engagement with the Middle East has expanded during
    the tenure of General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Par-
    ty (CCP) Xi Jinping and is driven partly by deepening strategic
    rivalry with the United States. In contrast to the Indo-Pacific,
    where China clearly seeks to displace the United States and
    consolidate a position as the dominant power, the Middle East
    is a region Chinese leaders view as a source of intractable se-
    curity challenges and value primarily for its resources and eco-
                                 (333)
                               334

  nomic potential. While China does not have the willingness and
  ability to replace the United States as a major contributor to
  regional security, it is nonetheless eager to instrumentalize the
  region in its efforts to construct a new, illiberal world order at
  the United States’ expense. China offers the region’s autocratic
  governments a vision of a new regional security architecture
  under the Global Security Initiative and is deepening its dip-
  lomatic relations with U.S. partners and adversaries alike to
  erode Washington’s influence.
• Beijing’s reaction to the Israel-Hamas war has illustrated both
  the limits of its diplomatic influence in the Middle East and
  its willingness to exploit regional tensions for geopolitical gain.
  China has played no significant role in the U.S.- and Arab-facil-
  itated negotiations between Israel and Hamas, having lost its
  credibility as a neutral actor by refusing to directly condemn
  the terrorist group for the October 7th attacks. It has not con-
  tributed to coalition efforts to protect maritime shipping from
  Houthi attacks, and in contravention of international maritime
  law and norms it has declined to use its naval ships deployed
  in the region to respond to distress signals from non-Chinese
  vessels. Rather, Beijing has sought to appeal to Arab states and
  burnish its image as the self-declared leader of what it calls the
  “Global South” by portraying itself as an ardent supporter of
  Palestinian national liberation and condemning Israel and the
  United States as oppressors.
• China is the largest trading partner for many countries in the
  region, with growth in total trade and direct investment be-
  tween China and the Middle East outpacing that of China with
  the rest of the world over the past five years. While China ben-
  efits from infrastructure contracts and expanding market share
  for its exports to the region, its principle economic objective re-
  mains securing steady flows of energy resources, with between
  40 and 50 percent of China’s total imported energy coming from
  the region.
• China and Iran have a similar interest in opposing the U.S.-
  led rules-based international order, but the relationship is to
  a large degree one of convenience. Just as it is using Russia’s
  diplomatic isolation to extract favorable terms on energy deals,
  China is opportunistically leveraging its consumption market to
  purchase discounted oil from Iran while going to great lengths
  to avoid the appearance of sanctionable transactions through
  the use of smaller purchases and shell companies.
• China’s military activities in the Middle East advance its eco-
  nomic interests while allowing the People’s Liberation Army
  (PLA) to gain operational experience and lay the foundation for
  a more robust future military presence.
• China is emerging as a global competitor in niche sectors of the
  Middle Eastern arms market. China is crucial to the develop-
  ment of the Iranian drone industry. Although the U.S. Depart-
  ment of the Treasury and the Department of Commerce have
  placed sanctions on a number of Chinese companies, Chinese
                                 335

    actors are crucial to supplying components that enable Iran to
    build drones, which it sells to Russia and to its Middle Eastern
    proxies such as the Houthis. China continues to either directly
    or indirectly provide regional actors with technologies that con-
    travene its voluntary but non-binding commitment to adhere to
    the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR). This includes
    Chinese state-owned enterprises and non-state actors’ contin-
    ued occasional and covert role in supplying Iran’s ballistic mis-
    sile program.
  • The Gulf is emerging as a new arena in U.S.-China technology
    competition, with concerns that close ties between sanctioned
    Chinese entities and technology firms in the region may be facil-
    itating transfer of leading-edge technology subject to U.S. export
    controls. Countries and companies in the Gulf may be compelled
    to choose between technology infrastructure and partnerships
    with China’s tech ecosystem or those with the United States
    and its allies. Increased deployment of Chinese-made surveil-
    lance technology is also a point of concern given its potential
    to enhance suppression tactics commonly used by authoritarian
    governments.
Recommendations
The Commission recommends:
 • Congress direct the Office of the Director of National Intel-
    ligence to produce and provide to the U.S. Department of
    the Treasury within six months a detailed study of Chinese
    purchases of Iranian oil over the span of the last five years.
    The study shall include analysis of China’s use of transship-
    ment points and shell companies as methods to insulate itself
    from sanctions. Congress should further direct that within
    six months of receipt of the study, the Treasury Department
    must make a determination if sanctionable activity is occur-
    ring and report its findings to Congress.
 • Congress direct the U.S. member on the International Maritime
    Organization (IMO) Council to use their voice and vote to re-
    quire China to abide by its treaty obligations under the IMO
    conventions, including by upholding safety regulations on the
    use of Automatic Identification System transponders.
Introduction
  In March 2023, media reporting claimed that China had success-
fully brokered an agreement between Iran and Saudi Arabia to
restore diplomatic relations, ending a seven-year dispute between
bitter rivals and fueling speculation that Beijing could someday re-
place the United States as chief peacemaker and predominant pow-
er in the Middle East.1 Chinese officials were quick to hail their role
in the talks, portraying the deal as a model for resolving “hotspot
issues” and a major victory for General Secretary Xi’s Global Se-
curity Initiative.2 The events set in motion by Hamas’s attack on
Israel in October 2023 shattered this narrative, however, revealing
China’s unwillingness to involve itself in a high-stakes regional cri-
sis or bear the costs of contributing to security for the wider region.
                                              336

  This chapter evaluates the nature and extent of China’s engage-
ment with Middle Eastern countries.* It first examines China’s ob-
jectives toward and views of the region before surveying China’s en-
gagement with Middle Eastern partners in the diplomatic, economic,
technology, and military realms. It concludes with implications for
the United States. This chapter draws on the Commission’s April
2024 hearing on “China and the Middle East,” consultations with
experts, and open source research and analysis.
China’s Diplomatic Activities in the Middle East:
   Wide, Varied, and Designed to Enhance Beijing’s
   Influence
   China’s economic engagement with the Middle East region has
been growing since the opening-up and reform era of the late
1970s, but the diplomatic and security aspects of its engagement
have deepened significantly over the past decade. During the Mao
era, China supported the national liberation movements of Arab
countries, as well as the Palestinian cause, but ties were lim-
ited as China turned largely inward in the 1960s and 1970s.3
In the late 1970s, Deng Xiaoping’s reforms laid the foundation
for expanding economic relations with Middle Eastern countries,
with total two-way goods trade between China and the region
rising from $3 billion in 1992 to $444.2 billion in 2023.4 Xi has
expanded China’s footprint in the region during his tenure, par-
ticularly by recruiting Middle Eastern states as partners for his
signature initiatives. For example, 21 Arab states, along with the
Arab League, have formally signed onto the Belt and Road Initia-
tive (BRI), 17 Arab states have endorsed Xi’s Global Development
Initiative, 15 have become members of the Asian Infrastructure
Investment Bank, and 14 have participated in the China-Arab
Cooperation Initiative for Data Security.† 5 In his written testi-
mony before the Commission, Jonathan Fulton, an associate pro-
fessor at Zayed University and nonresident senior fellow at the
Atlantic Council, assessed that “all in all, Chinese diplomacy has
been highly active and quite successful laying the groundwork for
a deeper presence in the Middle East.” 6
   China has developed a broad and systematic diplomatic ap-
proach to the Middle East, utilizing a variety of bilateral and
multilateral formats for engagement.7 Beijing defines its diplo-
matic relationships using different types of partnerships, which
Chinese scholar Xiang Haoyu, a research fellow at the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs-affiliated think tank China Institute of Interna-
tional Studies, asserts can be flexibly adapted to the counterpart
country’s conditions and needs (see Table 1).8 China has bilateral
diplomatic relations with all Middle Eastern countries, which in-
clude comprehensive strategic partnerships at the top level of the
  * Although the “Middle East” is a broad term often used to encompass North Africa, the Caucus-
es, and South and Central Asia, this chapter will primarily, but not exclusively, focus on China’s
relations with the following countries: Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Leba-
non, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, and Yemen.
  † Xi’s first diplomatic tour of the region took place in January 2016; he arrived first in Saudi
Arabia and then traveled to Egypt and Iran. During the visit, China inked Comprehensive Stra-
tegic Partnership agreements with both Iran and Saudi Arabia. Jonathan Fulton, “Friends with
Benefits: China’s Partnership Diplomacy in the Gulf,” Project on Middle East Political Science,
March 2019.
                                            337

diplomatic hierarchy, followed by strategic partnerships, friendly
cooperative partnerships, and an “innovative comprehensive part-
nership” with Israel exclusively.9 At the multilateral level, China
uses the China-Arab States Cooperation Forum (CASCF), made
up of Arab League members, and the Forum on China-Africa Co-
operation, which includes nine Arab League members, to map
out cooperation priorities with regular ministerial-level meetings
as well as sub-ministerial-level, issue-specific working groups.10
China also plays an influential role in BRICS and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO), which have both admitted Mid-
dle Eastern states as members in recent years.* 11 (For more on
China’s activities in BRICS and the SCO in 2024, see Chapter 2,
“U.S.-China Security and Foreign Affairs (Year in Review).”)

   Table 1: Types of China’s Diplomatic Partnerships in the Middle East

    Type of Diplomatic
       Partnership                         Scope                        Partners
 Comprehensive Strategic         Close cooperation in a        Egypt, Iran, Saudi
 Partnership                     wide range of areas and       Arabia, the United Arab
                                 coordination on regional      Emirates (UAE), Bahrain
                                 and international affairs
 Strategic Partnership           Coordination on regional      Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait,
                                 and international affairs,    Oman, Palestinian
                                 including military            Authority, Qatar, Syria,
                                                               Turkey
 Friendly Cooperative            Lowest tier, focused on       Lebanon, Yemen
 Partnership                     strengthening coopera-
                                 tion on bilateral issues
                                 including trade
 Innovative Comprehensive        Technology-focused            Israel
 Partnership
  Source: Various.12

   China also conducts diplomatic engagement on specific regional
issues through the appointment of special envoys. Beijing appointed
its first special envoy on the Middle East Issue focused on Israel
and Palestine in 2002 and a special envoy on the Syrian issue in
2016.13 Dr. Fulton assesses that the envoys are designed to pres-
ent China “as an actor with influence and interest in these issues,
although the impact of each has been marginal.” 14 For example, in
October 2023, Special Envoy Zhai Jun embarked on a tour aimed at
promoting peace talks between Israel and Hamas.15 Dr. Fulton said
the visit was intended primarily to “demonstrate China’s solidarity
with Arab causes” and promote an alternative vision for the region
from that offered by the United States.16 As of this writing, however,
neither the envoy nor China’s mediation efforts have contributed to
any substantive progress on talks between the two sides.17

   * According to Dr. Fulton’s written testimony before the Commission, BRICS expanded for the
first time in 2023 to include Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Iran, the UAE, and Ethiopia, providing the
organization with a presence in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) and Horn regions,
while the SCO admitted Iran in the same year. Bahrain, Egypt, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and
the UAE are all dialogue partners of the SCO but are still not full members. Jonathan Fulton,
written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on
China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3.
                                 338

China’s Interests in and Views of the Middle East
   China has varied economic and strategic interests in the Middle
East. In terms of economic goals, China seeks access to resources
and markets across the region, buying energy, increasing trade, and
winning infrastructure construction contracts.18 According to writ-
ten testimony before the Commission by Dawn C. Murphy, an asso-
ciate professor at the U.S. National War College, Beijing’s broader
diplomatic aims in the region include ensuring silence or supportive
statements from Arab states on Beijing’s actions in Xinjiang and
Hong Kong, garnering support for China’s stance on Taiwan and the
South China Sea, and promoting Xi’s signature initiatives like BRI,
the Global Development Initiative, and the Global Security Initia-
tive.19 China views the Middle East as part of a broader vision of a
new global order that is led by China and safe for illiberal, author-
itarian regimes like itself.20 China’s engagement with Middle East-
ern countries is illustrative of its broader effort to counterbalance
the United States and position itself as the leader of a new world
order based on its state-centered, authoritarian, self-proclaimed al-
ternative to Western liberalism.21
   China has sought to appeal to Middle Eastern governments on
the basis of its values, which are framed as promoting sovereignty,
territorial integrity, self-determination, and noninterference in the
domestic affairs of states rather than the liberal norms of democ-
racy, free markets, human rights, and international institutions.22
According to Dr. Fulton, by making these non-democratic values the
normative framework of its global initiatives, China has created an
attractive option for “governments and societies long frustrated by
the inconsistent promotion of liberal values from the west, or by
those that reject liberalism altogether.” 23 For example, China’s re-
action to the Israel-Hamas war—and in particular its support of the
Palestinian cause and condemnation of Israel as an extension of the
United States—has also been designed to reinforce its identity as
the leader of what it refers to as the “Global South.” 24 (For more on
China’s usage of the term “Global South,” see Chapter 2, “Security
and Foreign Affairs (Year in Review)”)
   However, China does not appear to wish to take up the U.S. role
of major security contributor or build a network of alliances in the
Middle East.25 According to Yun Sun, director of the China Program
at the Stimson Center, China instead envisions a new system in the
Middle East that would “displace U.S. dominance without replacing
it.” 26 China views the Middle East as an arena of strategic com-
petition with the United States, where its increased engagement
will facilitate the rise of an illiberal world order and accelerate the
decline of U.S. influence. Jon B. Alterman, director of the Middle
East Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies,
asserts that Beijing is seeking to “peel the region away from the
United States.” 27 At the same time, Dr. Alterman notes that China’s
“spectacular absence” of diplomatic engagement on Arab and Israe-
li issues, Red Sea navigation, and other issues where Beijing has
equities “is a sign that China’s not replacing [the United States] in
the Middle East and doesn’t want to play a larger role.” 28 Dr. Fulton
articulates that China’s economic interests in the region have not
required a corresponding political or security role, and Beijing has
                                             339

shown no indication that it will do so, instead benefiting from the
“U.S. security architecture that underpins the region’s fragile status
quo.” 29
   Finally, China continues to view the Middle East as a source of
instability and intractable security challenges, which it is not nec-
essarily willing or able to resolve. Chinese experts and analysts as-
sess the region as one of frequent crises, including conflict between
Israel and its neighbors, terrorism, political movements for democ-
ratization such as the Arab Spring, and potential threats to China’s
energy imports.30 China has also blamed the United States for the
region’s security problems, most recently asserting that Washing-
ton’s support for Israel in its war with Hamas has been a destabi-
lizing force.31
   Consistent with these interests and concerns, Chinese diplomatic
activities in the Middle East can be divided into three lines of effort
that will be explored in the following pages. The first is advancing
Chinese global leadership. The second is undermining U.S. relations
with key Middle Eastern partners, notably Saudi Arabia and the
UAE. The third is supporting U.S. adversaries, with a particular
focus on Iran.
Building Middle Eastern Support for Chinese Global
     Leadership
  The Middle East has become an important arena for the CCP to
advance its vision of a new China-led global order. A major aspect
of this effort is China’s increasing efforts to portray itself as a neu-
tral mediator in regional conflicts. In addition, China is heavily pro-
moting Xi’s three major initiatives—the Global Development, Global
Security, and Global Civilization Initiatives—as the framework for
implementing this bid for global leadership. Finally, China engages
the Middle East through multinational Beijing-led venues such as
the CASCF.
China Attempts to Paint Itself as a Responsible, Neutral Party
     in Mediation Efforts
   Beijing’s push to position itself as a conflict mediator in the
Middle East is part of a larger strategy to portray itself as a
global leader, although the effectiveness of these efforts is debat-
able.32 According to Dr. Murphy, China’s efforts to mediate dis-
putes in the region are not new, but Beijing has recently shown
a “willingness to publicize its behavior” and may encroach on the
United States’ regional interests.33 China’s role in the Saudi Ara-
bia-Iran rapprochement could be seen as a significant win for
China, but according to Dr. Fulton, most of the groundwork was
already laid before Beijing’s involvement, and the rapprochement
itself was the result of domestic political and economic pressures
within Saudi Arabia and Iran.* 34

  * China’s hosting of the final round of negotiations emerged from Xi’s December 2022 state
visit to Riyadh and a subsequent visit by Iranian President Ebrahim Raisi to Beijing in February
2023, although Oman and Iraq had played a major role in prior rounds of negotiation, hosting five
previous rounds of talks. The National, “Years of Secretive Talks behind Saudi-Iran Rapproche-
ment,” March 10, 2023; Jonathan Fulton, “Iran’s Economic Future Is Uncertain. It’s No Surprise
Why Raisi Visited China,” Atlantic Council, February 22, 2023; Maziar Motamedi, “Iran, Saudi
Arabia Hold Fifth Round of Talks in Baghdad,” Al-Jazeera, April 23, 2022.
                                             340

The Israel-Hamas War and the Limits of China’s Mediation
      Diplomacy
   In the decade leading up to the current conflict between Hamas
and Israel, Beijing sought to balance its relations with both sides
and paint itself as a neutral party, but ultimately it demonstrated
its limited approach through hollow rhetoric. In 2013, China offered
a proposal for a two-state solution during nearly simultaneous sep-
arate meetings with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas in Beijing.35 At the
time, Yitzhak Shichor, a professor of political science and Asian
studies at the University of Haifa, criticized China’s vague propos-
al,36 asserting that “it’s not really a plan, just a collection of slogans
trying to satisfy everybody.” 37 During 2017, China again met with
President Abbas and hosted the first Palestinian-Israeli Peace Sym-
posium since 2006.38 In 2021, Foreign Minister Wang Yi raised a
repackaged peace plan at the UN and during state visits to Middle
Eastern countries, which continued to be used as a high-profile and
rhetorical framing opportunity rather than an actionable proposal.39
In April 2023, just a month after China’s efforts to broker a peace
deal between Saudi Arabia and Iran, then Chinese Foreign Minister
Qin Gang held two separate phone calls with his Israeli and Pal-
estinian counterparts offering to facilitate peace talks between the
two sides.40 In a further attempt to boost Beijing’s standing in the
region, China signed a strategic partnership agreement with Pal-
estinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas during a June 2023
meeting, which included an economic and technological cooperation
pact, a deal on mutual visa exemption for diplomatic passports, and
the establishment of a diplomatic friendship between the Chinese
city of Wuhan and Ramallah.41 At a time of comparatively strained
relations between Israel and the United States, Prime Minister Ne-
tanyahu announced during a June 2023 meeting with U.S. members
of Congress that China had invited him to travel to Beijing.42 The
trip, originally planned for October 2023, was canceled after the out-
break of war in Gaza.43
   Beijing’s response to Hamas’s October 7th terrorist attack dam-
aged over a decade of relationship-building with Israel and exposed
its cynical use of the conflict to align itself with Arab countries at
the expense of Israel and its people.44 Moreover, Beijing’s response
to the attack has also been intended to burnish its image as the
self-declared leader of low- and middle-income countries—countries
it increasingly refers to as the “Global South”—and further its ri-
valry with the United States.45 Dr. Fulton argues that Beijing’s
response to events since the October 7th Hamas terrorist attack
have made China appear transactional and self-interested rather
than evoking an image of a responsible extra-regional power.46 On
October 8th, China’s foreign ministry initially issued a statement
that called on “relevant parties to remain calm, exercise restraint
and immediately end the hostilities,” failing to place the onus of
responsibility on Hamas for the attacks.47 The following day, Chi-
nese foreign ministry spokesperson Mao Ning expressed sympathy
for the victims but still failed to condemn Hamas.* 48 Spokesperson
  * On October 13th, Israel’s foreign ministry expressed “deep disappointment” to China’s envoy
to the Middle East over Beijing’s lack of a clear and unequivocal condemnation of Hamas. Re-
                                             341

Mao’s initial statement was made at the same time a U.S. biparti-
san congressional delegation of six senators met with Xi in Beijing,
during which time the delegation urged China to issue a stronger
condemnation of the attack.49 Minister Wang called for solidarity
among Muslim countries in a call to the Iranian foreign minister
just days later.* 50 Wang said in an October 15th call with his Saudi
counterpart that Israel’s actions in Gaza went “beyond the scope of
self-defense,” criticizing the actions as “collective punishment.” 51 On
October 23, 2023, Wang Yi spoke separately with high-level diplo-
mats from Israel and the Palestinian Authority, reportedly stating
that Israel’s “reasonable security concerns” could only be addressed
though a political settlement and expressing sympathy for the peo-
ple of Palestine while failing to condemn Hamas by name.† 52 In No-
vember 2023, China convened a special meeting of BRICS, attended
by Xi, to discuss the Israel-Hamas war.‡ 53 During the March 2024
National People’s Congress and Chinese People’s Political Consulta-
tive Conference, also known as the Two Sessions, Minister Wang told
a reporter that China supported full UN membership for Palestine,
taking a subtle jab at the United States by calling for “individual
Security Council members to refrain from placing obstacles in its
way.” 54 Dr. Murphy asserts that Beijing has utilized its presence in
the UN Security Council (UNSC) to further this aim, stating that “it
is likely Beijing’s position on the Israel-Hamas war and its UNSC
voting on this issue will positively resonate with the Arab World,
the Muslim-majority world, and many countries in the Global South
more broadly.” 55
   In subsequent months, China has focused on promoting intra-Pal-
estinian unity and has also held meetings with Israel that do not
appear to have created any discernible outcomes for advancing a
resolution to the conflict.56 In March 2024, Chinese diplomat Wang
Kejian made a multi-stop trip to the Middle East, meeting with rep-
resentatives from the Israeli Foreign Ministry and Palestinian Au-
thority, followed by a meeting in Qatar with Hamas political chair-
man Ismail Haniyeh (since killed while in Iran).57 In April 2024,
China hosted Hamas and Fatah officials, two rival factions, for talks
aimed at intra-Palestinian reconciliation, a follow-up to meetings
uters, “Israel Says ‘Deeply Disappointed’ Over Lack of China Condemnation of Hamas Attack,”
October 13, 2023.
  * China condemned Israel’s April 2024 strike on the Iranian Embassy in Damascus but not
Iran’s missile and drone attacks—its first direct attack on Israel from Iranian soil—with Minis-
ter Wang Yi stating in a call with his Iranian counterpart that Iran’s attack was a limited act
of self-defense. Xinhua, “Chinese, Iranian FMs Hold Phone Talks on Israel-Iran Tensions,” April
16, 2024; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Wang Yi Has a Phone Call with Foreign Minister
of Iran Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, April 15, 2024; Wall Street Journal, “Iran’s Direct Attack on
Israel Is a First,” April 15, 2024.
  † On October 8, 2024, following the one-year anniversary of the Hamas terrorist attack, a
foreign ministry spokesperson again paid lip service to Israel’s “reasonable security concerns”
without mentioning Hamas or acknowledging its role in the conflict. China’s Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Mao Ning’s Regular Press Conference on October 8, 2024,
October 8, 2024.
  ‡ The virtual meeting was chaired by President Cyril Ramaphosa of South Africa and attend-
ed by Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, Russian President Vladimir Putin, Crown
Prince of Saudi Arabia Mohammed bin Salman, Egyptian President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, Iranian
President Ebrahim Raisi, President Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan of the UAE, Ethio-
pian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed Ali, the foreign ministers of Argentina and India, and Chinese
Foreign Minister Wang Yi and Director of the CCP General Office Cai Qi. China’s Embassy in the
United States of America, Xi Jinping Attends the Extraordinary Joint Meeting of BRICS Leaders
and Leaders of Invited BRICS Members on the Situation in the Middle East with Particular
Reference to Gaza, November 22, 2023.
                                               342

between the two in Russia in February.58 That same month, Zhai
Jun, China’s Special Envoy on the Middle East Issue, met with Is-
raeli Ambassador to China Irit Ben-Abba Vitale to discuss the con-
flict; then, in June 2024, the two exchanged views on China-Israel
relations and “international and regional issues of mutual interest
and concern.” 59 Further rounds of talks between Palestinian fac-
tions were held in Beijing in July 2024, in which 14 groups signed
what was dubbed the “Beijing Declaration,” agreeing to recognize
unity under the framework of the Palestine Liberation Organiza-
tion, a nationalist umbrella organization composed of disparate fac-
tions that represents the Palestinians at international fora.60 How-
ever, experts doubt that this reconciliation in preparation for the
post-war rebuilding of Gaza represents the end of the rivals’ deep
divisions given the statement’s lack of a follow-up plan.61
Beijing Cultivates Middle Eastern Support for Chinese
    Initiatives and Global Leadership
   China is utilizing Xi’s foreign policy frameworks—the Global Se-
curity Initiative, the Global Development Initiative, and the Global
Civilization Initiative—in diplomacy with Middle Eastern countries
to cultivate support for Chinese leadership in matters of security,
development, and culture.62 Beijing has worked to attach the initia-
tives to various projects in order to advance their implementation
across the Middle East. It is not clear how effective these initiatives
have been in the region; Dr. Fulton says that although the three
initiatives have been appearing in joint communiques across the re-
gion and have been cited by local actors as useful contributions from
China, they do not appear to be widely understood yet, and many
local governments are not aware of them.63
Global Security Initiative
   The Global Security Initiative was first introduced by Xi in an
April 2022 speech at the Boao Forum and described as a proposal
to address “deficits in peace, development, security, and governance”
through adherence to six core concepts and principles that reflect
China’s preferences for regime security and state sovereignty.* 64
According to M. Taylor Fravel, a professor of political science at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, China is utilizing the initia-
tive to criticize and discredit the United States and its alliances,
opening up space for Chinese-led alternatives.65 Sheena Chestnut
Greitens, an associate professor at the University of Texas at Aus-
tin, sees the Global Security Initiative as the externalization of Xi’s
Comprehensive National Security Concept and an effort to “create
new forms of global security governance that bypass or reduce the
importance of the U.S. alliance system, thereby blunting Washing-
ton’s ability to contain China or foment ‘color revolutions’ inside
it.” 66 (For more on the Comprehensive National Security Concept,
  * These six principles are commitment to: (1) the vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative,
and sustainable security; (2) respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries;
(3) abiding by the purposes and principles of the UN Charter; (4) taking the legitimate securi-
ty concerns of all countries seriously; (5) peacefully resolving differences and disputes between
countries through dialogue and consultation; and (6) maintaining security in both traditional and
non-traditional domains. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, The Global Security Initiative Con-
cept Paper, February 21, 2023.
                                             343

see Chapter 7, “China’s New Measures for Control, Mobilization,
and Resilience.”)
  The Global Security Initiative lists the establishment of a “new
security framework” in the Middle East among its priorities for in-
ternational cooperation.* 67 Minister Wang reportedly introduced the
concept during the second China-led Middle East Security Forum in
September 2022.68 Minister Wang describes the new security archi-
tecture as emphasizing the leading role of Middle Eastern countries
in regional security affairs, abiding by the UN Charter, and focusing
on Israel-Palestine peace talks.69 According to Dr. Fravel, the frame-
work could be interpreted as an effort to undermine U.S. leadership
in the region, given its emphasis on resisting outside interference
and sanctions.70 Beijing presented the March 2023 normalization
of relations between Iran and Saudi Arabia in Beijing as a model
for resolving “hotspot issues” † and a major victory for the Global
Security Initiative, crediting it with a “wave of reconciliation” across
the region.71
Global Development Initiative
   The Global Development Initiative is China’s development frame-
work that Beijing claims aims to unite countries under the concepts
of common development and “win-win cooperation.” 72 This initiative
focuses on smaller-scale development projects ‡ implemented by the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in partnership with existing and new-
ly established multinational institutions, in contrast to BRI’s large
state-owned enterprise-driven infrastructure projects, but together
they act as drivers of China’s “South-South cooperation” strategy.§ 73
According to Chen Yunnan, a research fellow at the London-based
Overseas Development Institute, a global affairs think tank, the
Global Development Initiative is “conveniently free of the negative
optics and baggage that the BRI has accumulated over the years
with its spotty environmental record and especially, the polemical
  * The Global Security Initiative is frequently mentioned during China’s diplomatic meetings
and has been written into numerous bilateral and multilateral documents. Xi also promoted
the initiative during his second major diplomatic tour of the Middle East in December 2022,
mentioning it in speeches given at the first China-Gulf Cooperation Council and China-Arab
States Summits. China Institute of International Studies, “Report on the Implementation of the
Global Security Initiative,” July 2024, 10. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Building on Past
Achievements and Jointly Creating a Brighter Future of China-GCC Relations, December 9, 2022;
China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Carrying Forward the Spirit of China-Arab Friendship and
Jointly Building a China-Arab Community with a Shared Future in the New Era, December 9,
2022; Saudi Press Agency, “Riyadh Declaration - The First Arab-China Summit,” December 9,
2022; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Carrying Forward Our Millennia-Old Friendship and
Jointly Creating a Better Future, December 8, 2022.
  † Xi stated in June 2024 that international hotspot issues include Ukraine, the Israel-Hamas
conflict, the Korean Peninsula, Iran, Myanmar, and Afghanistan at an event in Beijing celebrat-
ing the 70th anniversary of the “Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence.” Shi Jiangtao, “China’s
Xi Jinping Calls on Nations to Unite against ‘Iron Curtains of Confrontation,’ ” South China
Morning Post, June 28, 2024.
  ‡ According to Manoj Kewalramani, a fellow in China studies and chair of the Indo-Pacific
Studies Programme at the Takshashila Institution, Global Development Initiative projects cover
domains including poverty reduction, food security, pandemic and vaccines, climate change, in-
dustrialization, the digital economy, digital connectivity, and development finance. Manoj Kewal-
ramani, “China as a Rising Norm Entrepreneur: Examining the GDI, GSI and GCI,” Trends in
Southeast Asia 2:2024 (January 2024).
  § China often uses the term “South-South cooperation” to refer to its engagement with develop-
ing countries. According to China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “South-South cooperation” is “an
important component of Deng Xiaoping Theory” that is necessary for developing countries to sup-
port and “enhance solidarity” with one another. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, A “Dialogue
of the Century” on South-South Cooperation, August 29, 2022.
                                              344

accusations of predatory lending and debt traps that it has been
unable to shake.” 74
  Since the Global Development Initiative was announced in 2021,
17 Arab countries have endorsed it and 12 Arab states have joined
the initiative’s “Group of Friends.” 75 A June 2023 progress report
on the initiative, published by the State Council-affiliated Center
for International Knowledge on Development, said that the Chi-
na-led Global Clean Energy Cooperation Partnership—which has
encouraged participation by members of the Arab League, the SCO,
BRICS, and others to make a joint effort in the development of green
and low-carbon energy—will be developed under the Global Devel-
opment Initiative framework, without providing further details on
how the initiative will enhance or change the partnership.76 During
a May 2024 speech, Minister Wang said China has initiated 30 de-
velopment cooperation projects involving Arab countries under the
Global Development Initiative.* 77
Global Civilization Initiative
  The Global Civilization Initiative is a Chinese framework intend-
ed to combat Western countries’ promotion of “universal values”
by advocating for the respect of a “diversity of civilizations.” 78 The
Global Civilization Initiative, launched in March 2023, is intended
to create an alternative framework to liberal values and norms.† 79
During Xi’s March 2023 speech announcing the initiative to the Chi-
nese Communist Party High-Level Dialogue with Political Parties,
he stated that countries must “refrain from imposing their own val-
ues or models on others.” 80 According to R. Evan Ellis, a research
professor at the U.S. Army War College Strategic Studies Institute,
“By promoting the relativism of values and arguing against calling
out bad behavior and seeking to stop it, the concept appeals to re-
gimes that desire to do what they wish.” 81
  While the initiative remains somewhat nebulous, an official read-
out from the July 2023 China-Arab States Political Parties Dialogue
suggests it will take the form of exchanges and cooperation between
local governments, think tanks, universities, nongovernmental or-
ganizations, and media entities.82 The readout also stated that the
CCP is “willing to invite” 200 leaders of Arab political parties, politi-
cal organizations, and think tank and media representatives to visit
China for exchanges every year, but it did not outline specific details
regarding which countries will be invited, what kinds of activities
they will participate in, or how long the CCP will carry out the ex-
changes.83 In May 2024, Xi announced that China would establish

   * The first batch of Global Development Initiative projects, published in 2022, listed projects
involving Middle Eastern countries that focus on issues such as pandemic response, poverty
reduction, green development, and food security and are sponsored by the China International
Development Cooperation Agency, China’s Ministry of Commerce, and various UN organizations.
Wang Yi has stated that a total of 45 development cooperation or aid projects were “underway or
under consideration” in the region. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Let Us Take Real Action to
Build a China-Arab Community with a Shared Future, May 30, 2024; China’s Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, List of First-Batch Projects of GDI Project Pool, September 21, 2022.
   † According to R. Evan Ellis, a research professor of Latin American studies at the U.S. Army
War College Strategic Studies Institute, “The emphasis on ‘civilizations’ arguably prioritizes Chi-
na, as well as other states with linkages to ancient empires, including Beijing’s current illiberal
partners Russia and Iran (Persia), and Global South countries China is courting (Egypt and
Turkey) while deprivileging the voice of the United States as a relatively new and heterogeneous
actor in ‘civilizational’ terms.” R. Evan Ellis, “The Trouble with China’s Global Civilization Ini-
tiative,” Diplomat, June 1, 2023.
                                             345

a China-Arab Center of the Global Civilization Initiative and work
with Arab countries to “achieve the goal of 10 million two-way visits
of tourists in the next five years.” 84 If these exchanges come to fru-
ition, this may indicate that Beijing sees the Middle East as a key
region for expanding the use of the Global Civilization Initiative as
a new brand and tool for greater soft power influence.

  China Garners Support from Middle East on Repressive
                          Uyghur Policies
    Although systematic elimination of Muslim religious expression
 is a central part of the human rights crisis taking place in the
 Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region (XUAR), the governments
 of Muslim majority countries have remained largely silent on the
 matter.85 China’s efforts have been successful in garnering the
 support of Arab countries in the Middle East, some of which have
 even issued statements of support of China’s policies in the region
 and have cooperated in returning Uyghurs to China, where they
 face prohibitions on Muslim religious practices, arbitrary deten-
 tion, and torture in contravention of international law.86
    Prior to the beginning of the crackdown in 2016, Uyghurs fre-
 quently traveled to the Middle East for business, for education,
 or to undertake the Hajj. Many Uyghurs were subsequently sent
 for “reeducation” * in the camps simply for traveling to one of 26
 “sensitive countries,” which included Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Saudi Ara-
 bia, Syria, Turkey, and the UAE.87 Yet, many of these countries
 have made statements of support for China’s policies through
 UN letters or during state visits.88 Middle Eastern diplomats
 and journalists are given tours of the region and encouraged to
 repeat Chinese narratives.89 Furthermore, some Middle Eastern
 countries—including Egypt, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syria, and the
 UAE—have been cooperating with the Chinese security services
 in locating, detaining, or providing for the refoulement of Uy-
 ghurs.90
    As a country with cultural affinity for Uyghurs and other Tur-
 kic peoples, Turkey’s policies are somewhat different, and it re-
 mains home to a large Uyghur diaspora. Even so, Turkey has
 increased its cooperation with China in recent years, limiting in-
 formation about the crisis in the media, constricting Uyghur ac-
 tivism, and increasing the threat of deportation.91 In June 2024,
 Turkish Foreign Minister Hakan Fidan made the first high-level
 visit to XUAR by a Turkish official since 2012, announcing great-
 er counterterrorism cooperation and trade while avoiding overt
 criticism of Beijing’s human rights abuses.† 92

   * In May 2014, Beijing launched its “Strike Hard Campaign against Violent Terrorism” in Xin-
jiang. According to Human Rights Watch, “Since at least 2014, the Chinese government has sub-
jected Turkic Muslims to various crimes against humanity, including mass arbitrary detention,
torture and deaths in detention, and enforced disappearances.” Human Rights Watch, “ ‘Break
Their Lineage, Break Their Roots’: China’s Crimes against Humanity Targeting Uyghurs and
Other Turkic Muslims,” April 19, 2021.
   † Foreign Minister Fidan commented during his visit that Xinjiang’s cities of Urumqi and Kash-
gar are “Turkic and Islamic cities,” which observers asserted could have been a subtle rejection
of China’s claims over the region. The Chinese media did not react to Fidan’s comments. Arslan
and Erkin Tarim, “In China, Turkish Foreign Minister Calls Urumqi and Kashgar ‘Turkic’ Cities,”
Radio Free Asia, June 6, 2024; Kasim Kashgar, “Turkish Diplomat’s Visit to Uyghur Region in
China Raises Concerns,” Voice of America, June 6, 2024.
                                              346

  China Garners Support from Middle East on Repressive
                   Uyghur Policies—Continued
    The leaders of Middle Eastern countries have evidently deter-
 mined that it is not in their interest to condemn crimes against
 humanity taking place in XUAR against a Muslim population.
 Obtaining silence or support from Middle Eastern countries for
 Chinese policies in Xinjiang, as well as Hong Kong and Taiwan,
 is a high priority in China’s engagement with the region, as Dr.
 Murphy pointed out in her testimony before the Commission.93
 Dr. Fulton observes that Middle Eastern countries have little in-
 centive to jeopardize their economic interests and trade relations
 and that China appears to have successfully framed the issue as
 one similar to Middle Eastern governments’ concerns about polit-
 ical Islam and terrorism.94

Beijing Engages China-Arab States Cooperation Forum to Bolster
     Regional Legitimacy
   Although China conducts diplomatic activities in a range of differ-
ent multilateral institutions and platforms, the CASCF, established
in 2004, serves as China’s primary multilateral coordination mech-
anism with the League of Arab States,* including the Gulf Coopera-
tion Council (GCC) countries.95 The CASCF holds ministerial meet-
ings every two years, and other senior officials meet on an annual
basis to implement any action plans that have been developed.96
The CASCF is used by China for several key purposes:
  • The forum emphasizes political cooperation with China, partic-
     ularly China’s “Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence” † and
     the concept of “South-South Cooperation.” 97 The Five Principles
     of Peaceful Coexistence “represent a very conservative interpre-
     tation of Westphalian norms of sovereignty, territorial integrity,
     and non-interference,” Dr. Murphy said.98 They stand in con-
     trast to the liberal, rules-based international order’s attention
     to human rights and democratic values, and in doing so they
     appeal to the region’s autocratic governments.
  • According to Dr. Murphy, the CASCF “explicitly includes coop-
     eration on key Arab political issues,” such as the Middle East
     peace process and more recently discussion of the ongoing con-
     flict in Gaza.99
  • China uses the forum to solicit support for various issues im-
     portant to China internationally. Dr. Murphy notes that one ex-
     ample of this type of behavior was the inclusion of wording in
     the CASCF documents supporting China’s position on territorial
     and maritime disputes in the South China Sea in 2016.100 Chi-

  * The League of Arab States includes Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia,
Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, and Yemen. Diplomatic Service of the European
Union, League of Arab States (LAS) and the EU, August 3, 2021.
  † The Five Principles are: mutual respect for territory and sovereignty, mutual nonaggression,
mutual noninterference in internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence.
China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Build a New International Order on the Basis of the Five
Principles of Peaceful Coexistence.
                                              347

     na likewise has used the forum to seek statements of support
     from Middle Eastern states for its policies in Xinjiang, provid-
     ing diplomatic cover for China’s human rights abuses against
     Uyghurs and other Turkic peoples.101 (See the “China Garners
     Support from Middle East on Repressive Uyghur Policies” text-
     box above for more on these efforts.)
  • China has also used the forum as a primary multilateral mech-
     anism to coordinate economic activities with the Middle East.102
   The most recent ministerial-level meeting of CASCF was held in
late May through early June 2024 and focused on issues such as
further economic and technological cooperation as well as a poten-
tial ceasefire in Gaza.103 China and the Arab states also issued a
21-point joint statement at the forum criticizing Israel and the Unit-
ed States, further demonstrating Beijing’s one-sided actions as it
has attempted to portray itself as a neutral mediator of the war.104
China Expands Engagement with Key U.S. Partners in the
    Middle East
  China is seeking to bolster its relations and influence with Arab
states in order to expand economic ties and promote its vision of
an alternative world order, and in the course of doing so it seeks
to exploit tensions in these countries’ relationships with the United
States. China places a particularly high priority on its relationships
with Saudi Arabia, the UAE, and Egypt, all of which have signed
comprehensive strategic partnership agreements with China and
hosted visits by Xi at least once—Egypt in 2016, the UAE in 2018,
and Saudi Arabia in 2016 and 2022.* 105 Minister Wang also made
stops during a six-country Middle East tour in 2021 and traveled
to Egypt during a four-country tour of African countries in 2024.106
China Seeks to Become Alternative Strategic Partner for Saudi
     Arabia
   China and Saudi Arabia have shown mutual interest in deepening
their relationship, as Riyadh has sought to court Beijing, and China
has attempted to portray itself as an essential strategic partner to
Saudi Arabia.107 Dr. Alterman asserts that China has sought to do
so “partly in the wake of Saudi concerns that the United States has
been abandoning the Middle East as it pivots toward Asia, and part-
ly by marketing the idea that the Chinese experience in economic
growth holds lessons for Saudi Arabia’s own ambitious economic di-
versification efforts.” 108 Saudi Arabia’s desire to draw closer to Chi-
na grew following the diplomatic fallout caused by the murder of
Jamal Khashoggi in 2018.109 Dr. Alterman notes, however, that this
motivation has dampened in recent years partly due to the Biden
Administration’s reassurance that the United States is not hostile
toward Saudi Arabia and because China’s regional diplomacy “is no
substitute for the United States.” 110 Despite this more recent U.S.
effort, Saudi Arabia has still pursued engagement with China, see-
ing BRI as a way to advance its Vision 2030 agenda.111 Prior to
   * Before Xi’s 2016 visit to Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Iran, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs pub-
lished the Arab Policy Paper, which laid out the blueprint for cooperation in a variety of areas,
emphasizing cooperation on energy, investment, and high technology. China’s Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, China’s Arab Policy Paper, January 13, 2016.
                                              348

Xi’s 2022 visit to the country, Saudi Arabian state media said the
Kingdom was keen to develop bilateral relations with China as part
of its strategic plan to boost partnerships with “all influential coun-
tries and international powers.” 112 The two sides enhanced their
Comprehensive Strategic Partnership, issuing a joint declaration on
economic and defense cooperation in December 2022.113 During the
2022 trip, Xi also attended the first Arab-China Summit for Coop-
eration and Development held in Riyadh in what the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs called the “highest-level diplomatic event between
China and the Arab world since the founding of the People’s Repub-
lic of China.” 114
   China’s relations with Saudi Arabia have been rooted in econom-
ic interests, although there is also a small, somewhat limited mili-
tary strand that runs through bilateral ties.115 Dr. Alterman notes
that since the 1990s, Saudi Arabia has engaged more deeply with
Chinese firms when it sought low-cost construction options amid
a slumping economy, with Chinese firms building some of Saudi
Arabia’s most important infrastructure projects, including light rail,
desalination plants, and industrial projects, as well as contributing
to the country’s information technology (IT) systems.116 Saudi Ara-
bia occasionally sought to procure Chinese weapons and technology
as alternatives to those the United States would not provide, like
CSS-2 missiles in the 1980s, with China now selling Saudi Arabia
drones, helping Riyadh build ballistic missiles, and being involved
in domestic surveillance efforts.117

         China-Saudi Cooperation on Ballistic Missiles
    Saudi Arabia is diversifying its own arms procurement in re-
 sponse to Iran’s growing military capabilities, including by acquiring
 Chinese ballistic missile technology and expertise. Although China
 is not a member of the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR),
 China’s government nevertheless made a formal voluntary commit-
 ment in 2000 to abide by its export restrictions on ballistic missile
 components and technology.118 Despite this, China has played a key
 role in Saudi Arabia’s missile procurement efforts.119 In the late
 1980s, China first delivered liquid-propelled Dong Feng-3A (DF-3A)
 missiles to Saudi Arabia, yet the transfer was not publicly acknowl-
 edged until 2014.120 China has reportedly also transferred addi-
 tional Dong Feng-class missiles to Riyadh since 2018.* 121 Although
 U.S. intelligence agencies have raised concerns about the transfers,
 the United States was reluctant to impose consequences on Saudi
 Arabia in 2021, a strategic partner in the region, according to the
 Wall Street Journal.122 The Arms Control Association asserts that
 although not illegal, China’s assistance to Saudi Arabia “contradicts
 its vow to abide by the MTCR,” as China is not a member of the ex-
 port control regime but has pledged to adhere to its guidelines pro-
 hibiting the export of missiles capable of delivering a 500-kilogram
 payload more than 186 miles (300 kilometers).123 In December 2021,

  * Dong Feng ballistic missiles, produced by the China Aerospace Science and Industry Corpo-
ration, have a range of approximately 170 miles to 9,320 miles. The missiles have the capability
to engage targets at short, medium, intermediate, and intercontinental ranges and are equipped
with diverse warhead-carrying capabilities, enabling strong deterrence abilities. Army Technology,
“Dongfeng (DF) Ballistic Missiles, China,” August 15, 2022.
                                  349

 China-Saudi Cooperation on Ballistic Missiles—Continued
 analysts from the James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Stud-
 ies, affiliated with the Middlebury Institute of International Studies
 at Monterey, assessed that satellite images of a missile facility near
 Al-Dawadmi, Saudi Arabia, indicate the facility was likely built with
 Chinese assistance.124 During the same month, reports emerged
 that U.S. intelligence agencies had assessed that Saudi Arabia was
 producing ballistic missiles domestically with Chinese assistance.125
 It remains unclear whether the missile being produced at the iden-
 tified site is a Chinese design, but given China’s large transfers of
 ballistic missile technology to Riyadh, it is certainly possible.126

UAE Carrying Out Balancing Act between the United States and
     China
   China views the UAE as a country where the United States is
gradually losing its influence, and one with whom Beijing has an
opportunity to deepen its cooperation. According to a 2020 article
by Chinese scholar Tong Fei, an associate researcher at the Chi-
nese Academy of Social Sciences’ Institute of West-Asian and Afri-
can Studies, as the United States has shifted its focus to Asia, Arab
countries—including the UAE—have pursued alternative partners,
particularly in the economic realm.127 The UAE is home to an es-
timated quarter million Chinese nationals, and Chinese firms are
active there in construction and other fields.128 Dr. Tong asserts that
“since adopting an eastward foreign policy, the UAE has made deep-
ening its comprehensive strategic partnership with China a top pri-
ority in its diplomatic goals.” 129 In his testimony to the Commission,
Dr. Alterman noted that “the Abu Dhabi government increasingly
has sought to strike an ‘active neutrality’ posture in the world,”
growing its ties with both China and Russia and confident that it is
powerful enough to advance its own interests.130
   Despite the UAE’s willingness to work with Beijing, Chinese ex-
perts still assess that there are challenges in their diplomatic re-
lations that need to be overcome. Dr. Tong assesses that although
the UAE hopes to take advantage of BRI, strengthen investment
cooperation with China, get rid of excessive dependence on oil, and
accelerate its economic diversification process, the two countries
have little understanding of each other due to regional differences
and separate ideologies.131 Dr. Tong argues that government offi-
cials and ordinary people in the UAE not only lack a deep under-
standing of China but also have doubts about Beijing’s Middle East
policy.132 Furthermore, Dr. Tong states that “some UAE elites hope
that China can assume more peace and security responsibilities in
the Middle East and become a force that can compete with the Unit-
ed States in the Middle East” but that the UAE has concerns about
China’s cooperation with Iran, which it views as a threat.133 Dr.
Tong also asserts that some within the UAE are dissatisfied with
the trade deficit with China, as China has used BRI to obtain en-
ergy from the UAE but is unwilling to buy petrochemical products
the UAE wants to sell to China.134 Dr. Tong assesses that because
of this, “it can be said that the mutual political trust in the coopera-
                                  350

tion between the two sides is still relatively fragile.” 135 (For more on
the challenges that China and the UAE’s technological cooperation
face under increasing U.S. scrutiny, see the section on “China-Middle
East Technology Relations” within this chapter.)

        The Reach of Chinese Media in the Middle East
    Over the past decade, China has dramatically increased its ef-
 forts to build what it calls “discourse power”—the ability to shape
 global public opinion in the way it does domestically—through its
 media presence in Middle Eastern countries.136 It has been pour-
 ing resources into expanding the reach of foreign-facing media
 outlets in the region.137 Chinese government-connected entities
 and their proxies have been holding summits, tours, and train-
 ings with foreign journalists, encouraging them to echo Chinese
 narratives while also controlling local traditional and new media
 outlets.138 China has become increasingly adept at utilizing local
 languages to communicate its preferred narratives, focusing on
 economic cooperation and providing positive stories on China.139
 In addition to Arabic-language versions of official media such
 as CGTN, overseas Chinese networks like China-Arab TV serve
 official narratives as well, partnering with China’s Central Pro-
 paganda Department to strengthen cooperation in film and TV
 production in order to “transmit China’s voice” and “promote Chi-
 na’s image among Arab countries.” 140 In 2022, the China Media
 Group, a Chinese state media organization, and the Saudi Min-
 istry of Media launched a joint partnership initiative to promote
 relations between Arab countries and China at the Arab-Chinese
 Media Cooperation Forum.141 The initiative focuses on promoting
 the presence of Chinese media in Arab channels and translating
 Chinese television shows into Arabic for broadcast in the Palestin-
 ian Territories, Algeria, Jordan, Sudan, Iraq, and Saudi Arabia.142
    Chinese experts and state media have pushed a narrative that
 frames the United States’ supposedly declining influence in the re-
 gion as an opportunity for Beijing to increase its engagement. For
 example, a July 2022 article by Tang Zhichao, a professor at the
 University of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, argued that
 the Obama, Trump, and Biden Administrations were “obsessed with
 strategic competition among major powers and implemented a pol-
 icy of strategic contraction from the Middle East to achieve a shift
 to the Asia-Pacific region,” which he claims created a vacuum in re-
 gional power and security.143 Dr. Tang argues in a February 2024 ar-
 ticle that during the 30 years of the post-Cold War era, “the United
 States’ hegemonic position in the Middle East has gradually fallen
 from high to low,” which has prompted regional countries to “increas-
 ingly strengthen their strategic autonomy, providing an important
 opportunity for the strategic cooperation between China, Russia and
 Middle Eastern countries to be enhanced.” 144 Gao Wencheng, a Xin-
 hua news reporter, also said in June 2023 that recently, “failure” has
 become a common keyword when the international media discusses
 the United States’ Middle East policy, claiming the United States
 has lost the “hearts of the people” in the region due to “wanton bul-
 lying.” 145
                                              351

Supporting Iran and Terrorist Groups to Undermine the
     United States
  China and Iran share strong opposition to the U.S.-led liberal in-
ternational order.146 As it does with other countries in the region,
China takes an opportunistic approach to its relationship with
Iran.147 China will show solidarity with Iran to the degree that it
comes at little cost to Beijing; at the same time, it takes advantage
of Iran’s isolated position, buying discounted oil and failing to fully
deliver on promised investments.148 Dr. Alterman argues that China
leverages tensions between the United States and Iran, preferring
“a world in which the United States is bogged down in the Middle
East and alienates much of the Global South through its actions
there.” 149 China has shown support to Iran through its rhetorical,
military, and economic actions, all of which serve to undermine U.S.
interests in the region.
Beijing Props Up Tehran with Rhetorical and Diplomatic
     Support
   China has played a significant role in easing Iran’s diplomatic iso-
lation in recent years, particularly through its efforts to shield Iran
from further sanctions over its nuclear program. China vocally crit-
icized the re-imposition of sanctions by the United States in 2018
after the United States withdrew from the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action.150 It has stated opposition to sanctions on Iran and
condemned the United States’ Iran policy, with Xi stating during a
February 2023 meeting with then Iranian President Ebrahim Raisi
that China “opposes external forces interfering in Iran’s internal
affairs and undermining Iran’s security and stability.” 151 A likely
motivation was that the 2018 sanctions dampened the potential for
Chinese trade and investment with Iran despite continued engage-
ment by China’s more risk-tolerant companies.152
   China has also eased Iran’s isolation by drawing it into China-led
multilateral institutions, with Iran finally achieving its longstand-
ing goal of joining the SCO in 2023.* 153 In 2010, the SCO intro-
duced a membership criteria preventing states with UN sanctions
from joining—a move some assess was aimed at preventing Iran’s
accession.154 Despite these initial impediments, Iran’s Supreme Na-
tional Security Council announced in August 2021 that the “political
obstacles” to accession were resolved through dialogue with Russia,
according to Nicole Grajewski, a fellow at the Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace.155 In addition to smoothing out its differ-
ences with Tajikistan, Dr. Grajewski said, Iran mustered enough
support from China to back its accession.† 156 Presently, Iran is the
   * Iran first applied for full membership in the SCO in 2008 and became an observer state in
2005. The SCO is mainly a platform for security cooperation, conducting military exercises, and
fighting what China calls the “three evils of terrorism, separatism and extremism,” serving as
what scholar Nicole Bayat Grajewski calls a “regime-preservation network” to help coordinate in-
ternal repression. While the organization is presently little more than a “talking shop,” according
to Dr. Fulton, it could become a “a key platform for institutionalizing authoritarian cooperation
and resilience.” Jonathan Fulton, “Iran Joining the SCO Isn’t Surprising. But Beijing’s Promotion
of Illiberal Norms in Eurasia Should Get More Attention,” Atlantic Council, July 13, 2023; Nicole
Bayat Grajewski, “Iran and the SCO: The Quest for Legitimacy and Regime Preservation,” Middle
East Policy 30:2 (Summer 2023).
   † Then Iranian Foreign Minister Hossein Amir-Abdollahian thanked his Chinese counterpart,
Wang Yi, for supporting the country’s membership bid in September 2021. Nicole Grajewski,
                                             352

only Middle Eastern country to have full membership in the SCO,
opening up potential closer coordination with China and Russia.* 157
  Iran’s accession into the BRICS organization † on January 1, 2024,
represents another instance of entrance into alternative multina-
tional institutions, having received some rhetorical support from
Beijing. While Russia was the original organizer, BRICS has be-
come a high-profile vehicle of China’s “South-South” Cooperation
strategy, with Minister Wang calling on it to “oppose attempts to
instigate a new Cold War” at the June 2024 ministerial meeting
in Russia.158 In July 2023, Chang Hua, China’s then ambassa-
dor to Iran, said in an interview with Iranian media that “Chi-
na supports Iran’s membership in the BRICS organization . . . .
Although the agreement of other BRICS members is necessary,
we support Iran’s aspiration to join the organization.” 159 General
Secretary Xi met with then President Raisi on the sidelines of
the BRICS Summit in August 2023, saying China “stood ready
to strengthen cooperation with Iran on BRICS and other multi-
lateral platforms.” 160 Although BRICS membership may serve to
further align Iran with China and Russia, other members of the
organization might have concerns about the possibility of being
drawn into an anti-U.S. bloc.
China’s Transfer of Dual-Use Technology to Iran and Its
     Terrorist Groups Threatens U.S. National Security
     Interests
  China’s transfer of dual-use technologies and components to Iran
and its terrorist proxies—including parts used in armed drones and
ballistic missiles—undermines U.S. national security interests and
stability in the region.‡ In 2023 and 2024, the Treasury Department
placed sanctions on networks of Chinese suppliers and Hong Kong
front companies selling components to the Iranian ballistic missile
and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) programs, including the produc-
ers of the Shahed drone used by Russia in Ukraine and in attacks
on shipping in the Red Sea.161 The Department of Commerce’s Bu-
reau of Industry and Security has also placed Chinese and Hong
Kong companies on the Entity List in 2023 and 2024 for supplying
dual-use components for Iran’s UAV industry.162 U.S. Assistant Sec-
retary of State for Near Eastern Affairs Barbara Leaf testified in
2022 that Iranian proxies are using Chinese UAVs, and the Chinese
government is not attempting to curtail the sales.163 According to

“Iranian Membership in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization: Motivations and Implications,”
Washington Institute for Near East Policy, September 15, 2021.
  * Full members of the SCO include: China, India, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan,
Russia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan. Observer states include Afghanistan, Belarus, and Mongolia.
Dialogue partners include Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Cambodia, Egypt, Kuwait, Maldives,
Myanmar, Nepal, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Turkey, the UAE, and Qatar. Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, “General Information,” January 9, 2017.
  † The intergovernmental organization originally comprised Brazil, Russia, India, China, and
South Africa, with Iran entering alongside Egypt, Ethiopia, and the UAE in January 2024. Russia
organized and hosted the first summit in 2009, with meetings held annually going forward. The
organization is now sometimes referred to as BRICS+. Marc Jütten and Dorothee Falkenberg,
“Expansion of BRICS: A Quest for Greater Global Influence?” European Parliamentary Research
Service, March 2024.
  ‡ According to a 2024 U.S. Department of Justice press release, four Chinese nationals were
indicted and charged with several crimes for illegally exporting and smuggling U.S.-origin elec-
tronic components used in UAVs and ballistic missiles to Iran. U.S. Department of Justice, Chi-
nese Nationals Charged with Illegally Exporting U.S.-Origin Electronic Components to Iran and
Iranian Military Affiliates, January 31, 2024.
                                            353

Iranian media reports, China has supplied Iran with access to the
BeiDou satellite navigation system, a rival to the U.S. GPS system,
which could bolster drone and missile performance and targeting
through its advanced navigation and communication system.* 164
   Chinese military equipment and components have allegedly
been obtained by Hamas and the Houthis, highlighting the po-
tential danger of Chinese products supporting the operations of
non-state actors in the region. After October 2023, the Associated
Press and the Israel Defense Forces reported that Hamas was
using China-origin weapons in Gaza.165 Although China claims
it does not sell weapons to non-state actors, reports indicate the
Chinese-made weapons may have been sold elsewhere in the Mid-
dle East and then smuggled to Hamas terrorists.166 An investi-
gation by Israeli Defense Forces found that Hamas has obtained
advanced weapons and technology made in China, including car-
tridges and rifle sights for M16 assault rifles, automatic grenade
launchers, and communication devices.167
   Chinese components have also appeared in weapons used by
Iran and its Houthi proxies in attacks on Saudi Arabia. Drones
used in a September 2019 attack on two Saudi Aramco facili-
ties claimed by the Houthis but attributed to Iran by the United
States and a UN investigation were later revealed to be Shahed
131 drones, which utilize motors resembling the MDR-208 sin-
gle rotor UAV engine, made by Beijing MicroPilot UAV Flight
Control Systems, a Chinese company.† 168 Iran has supplied these
and other UAVs and missiles to the Houthis for their attacks on
targets across the Middle East.169 While one Chinese military
blogger has speculated that the Houthi rebels were potentially
using Chinese missile technology previously shared with Iran, to
date there has been no public evidence that the Chinese govern-
ment is directly transferring weapons to the Houthis.170 However
there is evidence that weapons used by Houthi rebels contain
Chinese-made parts.‡ 171 Furthermore, in June 2024, the Trea-
sury Department announced that Ali Abd-al-Wahhab Muham-
mad al-Wazir, a China-based Houthi-affiliated individual, played
a “key role in procuring materials that enable Houthi forces to
manufacture advanced conventional weapons inside Yemen.” 172
He utilized his China-based company, Guangzhou Tasneem Trad-
ing Company Limited (Guangzhou Tasneem), a subsidiary of
Hong Kong-based Tasneem Trading Company Limited, to obtain
these items and ship them to Yemen.173



  * A 2015 Iranian media report stated that BeiDou was establishing ground stations in Iran and
had signed an MOU with Iran Electronics Industries, a state-owned company owned by Iran’s
Ministry of Defense and subject to U.S sanctions. Mehr News Agency, “Chinese BeiDou BDS to
Transfer Satellite Tech. to Iran,” October 18, 2015; U.S. Department of the Treasury, Treasury
Designates Iranian Military Firms, September 17, 2008.
  † The Ukrainian military claims Russia is also sourcing engines from Beijing MicroPilot UAV
Flight Control Systems for its Iranian Shahed attack drones. The Wall Street Journal reports
that Russia has launched more than 4,000 Iranian Shahed drones. Benoit Faucon et al., “The
Russian Drone Plant That Could Shape the War in Ukraine,” Wall Street Journal, May 28, 2024.
  ‡ The UN panel report that identified the Chinese-origin components also identified UAV and
missile components sourced from Iran, Japan, Belarus, Germany, and the Czech Republic via a
network of intermediaries. Farzin Nadimi, “The UN Exposes Houthi Reliance on Iranian Weap-
ons,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, February 13, 2020.
                                                 354

   China Increases Purchases of Sanctioned Oil from Iran
    China has increased imports of Iranian oil in recent years by
 constructing a parallel network of shippers, refineries, and finan-
 cial institutions to obscure imports and bypass U.S. sanctions.174
 Taken in conjunction with its increased purchases of sanctioned
 Russian oil, China is constructing what researchers at the At-
 lantic Council have dubbed an “axis of evasion” that undermines
 U.S. sanctions, profiting in the near term from discounted ener-
 gy imports while establishing an alternative trade and payment
 system that may buffer it from future economic sanctions.175
 According to estimates by the nonprofit United Against Nuclear
 Iran and others who track data on Iranian oil exports, China im-
 ported 1.1 million barrels per day (bpd) from Iran in 2023, up 9
 percent from the year prior.176 If correct, this would mean China
 is now responsible for purchasing nearly 90 percent of Iranian
 crude exports,* which would account for nearly 10 percent of to-
 tal Chinese crude imports, making Iran the fourth-largest sup-
 plier to China in 2023, just behind Iraq.177 Chinese customs did
 not report any oil imports from Iran in 2023, so it appears oil is
 imported through transshipment facilities in Malaysia, the UAE,
 and Oman and relabeled as “Middle Eastern” oil.178 China is es-
 timated to have imported 1.4 million bpd on average through the
 first five months of this year.179
    The sanctioned oil is transported by a so-called “dark fleet”
 of older tankers that use a variety of tactics to avoid detection,
 such as turning off signaling systems when making Iranian port
 calls, sending fake location information (known as “spoofing”),
 and conducting ship-to-ship transfers outside authorized trans-
 fer zones using the cover of bad weather to hide operations, a
 practice that heightens the risk of an environmentally costly ac-
 cident.180 According to testimony before the Commission by Erica
 Downs, senior research scholar at Columbia University’s Center
 on Global Energy Policy, independent refineries known as “tea-
 pots” purchased all the Iranian crude oil imported into China in
 2023.181 China’s large state-owned oil companies have curtailed
 their involvement in purchasing and processing Iranian oil since
 late 2019 after the re-imposition of sanctions following the U.S.
 withdrawal from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.182
    Congress and the Administration have taken a number of re-
 cent actions intended to address the issue. Since 2021, over 180
 entities and individuals have been sanctioned for their involve-

  * Iran’s estimated revenue from oil exports was $12 billion over the first three months of the gov-
ernment’s fiscal year starting in March 2024. For comparison, the country’s gross domestic product in
2023 was $401.5 billion and the government’s budget for 2024 is estimated to be $49.2 billion, about
equivalent to expected total revenue from oil exports. In other words, China’s oil purchases from Iran
appear to equate to nearly 90 percent of Iran’s entire government budget, though due to associated
costs oil export revenue is believed to directly fund 45.4 percent of the government’s operating budget.
Given the scale of China’s oil purchases from Iran, and lack of alternative buyers due to sanctions,
Beijing appears to have immense capacity to influence Tehran. There is little evidence that China
has used this leverage with respect to Iran’s support for proxies in the Middle East—such as Houthi
attacks on shipping (other than perhaps protecting Chinese flagged ships) and Hezbollah—or Iran’s
direct attacks on Israel. Iran International, “Iran Faces 26% Oil Revenue Deficit Despite Surging
Exports,” October 5, 2024; Dalga Khatinoglu, “Iran’s Oil Exports Hit a 5-Year High in 2024,” Iran
International, July 1, 2024; World Bank Group, “Iran, Islamic Rep.”; Iran International, “Iran’s Gov-
ernment Plans to Increase Taxes amid Economic Crisis,” November 11, 2023.
                                 355

  China Increases Purchases of Sanctioned Oil from Iran—
                            Continued
 ment in the trade of sanctioned Iranian oil.183 Congress included
 two sanctions measures as part of the supplemental appropria-
 tions package enacted in April 2024: (1) the Stop Harboring Ira-
 nian Petroleum (SHIP) Act directs the president to sanction for-
 eign persons involved in activity related to Iranian oil, to include
 refineries and port owners and operators; and (2) the Iran-China
 Energy Sanctions Act of 2023 expands the definition of “signifi-
 cant financial transactions” in the fiscal year (FY) 2012 National
 Defense Authorization Act to include those by Chinese financial
 institutions that involve Iranian oil exports, and it also directs
 the president to make an annual determination on whether fi-
 nancial institutions have engaged in such activity.184

China’s Economic, Trade, and Investment Interests
   in the Middle East
   China replaced the United States as the Middle East’s largest
trade partner in 2010, and China-Middle East economic ties have
deepened in the years since.185 Economic relations feature prom-
inently in China’s engagement with countries in the region, with
Chinese companies increasing their physical presence in key logis-
tical nodes of the global supply chain and seeking to shore up ac-
cess to critical resources.186 In January 2016, the State Council of
the People’s Republic of China presented an Arab Policy Paper that
outlined its priorities and approach to economic cooperation with
key Middle Eastern countries and served as a template for policy
toward most of the region.187 The paper called for establishment of
a “1+2+3 cooperation pattern” with energy cooperation at the core;
infrastructure construction and expanding trade and investment as
the “two wings”; and nuclear energy, space satellites, and new en-
ergy as “three breakthroughs” that together would be the defining
elements of relationships with Arab countries.188 Based on China’s
behavior in the region and these expressions of its plans, it seems
likely that in the short to medium term China will continue to as-
sign top priority to ensuring steady access to the region’s energy
resources and will seek to benefit from increased market access and
infrastructure contracts.189 In the long term, as a transition away
from fossil fuels alters the region’s position in global trade, China
will seek to evolve cooperation with key countries in the region to
advance toward its goals of establishing emerging technologies like
artificial intelligence (AI), advanced computing, and clean energy as
central economic growth drivers.190
Trends in Trade and Investment
  China has become the largest trading partner for many countries
in the region, with growth in total trade and direct investment be-
tween China and the Middle East outpacing that of China with the
rest of the world over the past five years.191 In 2022, China was the
top origin country for goods imports for ten out of 15 Middle Eastern
countries, an increase from five a decade earlier and zero in 2002.192
                                             356

As an export destination for goods, China ranked first for six coun-
tries in 2022, up from three in 2012 and zero in 2002.193
Energy Relations
  Energy trade remains a mainstay of China-Middle East economic
engagement, comprising roughly 85 percent of total exports from
the region to China by value in recent years.194 China became a
net importer of crude oil in 1993; since that time, imported energy
from the Middle East has provided a sizable share of the fuel Chi-
na consumes.195 While exports from Persian Gulf countries * to the
United States and the EU have trended downward since the ear-
ly 2000s, China’s crude oil imports from the region have increased
from about 34 million metric tons at the turn of the century to about
257 million metric tons in 2021 (see Figure 1).196 The Middle East
has consistently accounted for 40–50 percent of China’s total oil and
gas imports dating back to the mid-1990s.197 China’s imports of hy-
drocarbons from the region have continued to grow in recent years,
as have two-way investments and long-term agreements to lock in
consistent supply over the coming decades.198 However, as China
and key suppliers in the Gulf move to transition segments of their
economy to clean and renewable energy, the dynamic of dependen-
cy is set to shift, where China may become a supplier of batteries,
solar, and nuclear energy systems to the region and Gulf countries
may find themselves in competition with Chinese firms to build out
energy infrastructure in third countries.199
Trade of Hydrocarbons Remains Substantial
  China’s rapid rise, vast population, and industrialization have
made it the world’s largest consumer of energy, largest producer and
consumer of coal, and largest emitter of carbon dioxide from burn-
ing hydrocarbons.200 In 2021, coal provided the majority of China’s
energy for consumption (55 percent), followed by petroleum (19 per-
cent), natural gas (9 percent), hydropower (8 percent), non-hydro re-
newables (7 percent), and nuclear energy (2 percent).201 For oil and
natural gas, China remains heavily reliant on imports, primarily
from Russia and the Middle East.† 202 Virtually all of China’s energy
imports from the region are shipped through key maritime choke-
points, including the Strait of Hormuz and the Strait of Malacca, a
point of concern for PLA military planners.203 (For further discus-
sion on China’s oil stockpiling and related measures, see Chapter 7,
“China’s New Measures for Control, Mobilization, and Resilience.”)
Oil Exports to Chinese Market Steadily Rise
  With limited domestic production capacity of its own, China relies
on imported oil to power large parts of its transportation and indus-
  * The Persian Gulf includes eight countries—Bahrain, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Oman,
Qatar, and the UAE—which together sit atop half the world’s known oil reserves. Though all but
Iran are members of the Arab League, the “Gulf Arab states” or “Arab Gulf” often also excludes
Iraq, referring solely to the six Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) members. RAND Corporation,
“Persian Gulf Region,” 2024; Simon Henderson, “Understanding the Gulf States,” Washington
Institute for Near East Policy, March 31, 2014.
  † Oil and liquified natural gas (LNG) make up the majority of imports to China from Middle
Eastern countries, from 99 percent of total dollar value of imports from Iraq on the high end to
69 percent with the UAE on the low end in 2023. Erica Downs, written testimony for U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19,
2024, 1.
                                                                     357

trial sectors.204 China’s imports of crude oil nearly doubled over the
past decade from just over six million bpd in 2014 to 11.3 million
bpd in 2023, a record high.205 According to Chinese customs data,
flows from the Middle East over this time period increased from
3.2 million bpd in 2014 to 5.2 million bpd in 2023, 46 percent of
China’s total crude imports.206 Saudi Arabia became China’s largest
crude oil supplier in 2018 and remained so until Russia replaced it
in 2023 due to China’s substantial purchases of discounted oil sub-
ject to sanctions in other markets.207 In 2023, Russia supplied 19
percent of China’s imported crude oil, followed by Saudi Arabia (15
percent), Iraq (11 percent), Malaysia (10 percent), and the UAE and
Oman (both 7 percent).208 However, it is believed that a significant
portion attributed to Malaysia, the UAE, and Oman is relabeled oil
from Iran.209 For instance, Malaysia’s total crude oil production in
2023 was 501,000 bpd, yet Chinese customs reported importing 1.1
million bpd, suggesting a sizable portion of the difference was oil
transshipped through the country.210

                          Figure 1: Crude Oil Imports from Persian Gulf Countries, 2000–2022

                          300


                          250
 Metric Tons (millions)




                          200


                          150


                          100


                           50


                            0
                                2000   2002   2004   2006   2008    2010   2012    2014    2016   2018   2020   2022

                                                            China          United States


  Source: UN Comtrade database.
  Note: Persian Gulf countries include Bahrain, Kuwait, Iran, Iraq, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Qatar,
and the UAE.

  Saudi Arabia has sought to increase investment and joint ven-
tures in downstream refining capacity with Chinese petrochemical
companies to lock in long-term purchase contracts as global demand
for traditional crude oil products like gasoline and diesel is set to
decline. The Saudi government is prepared to spend $100 billion
by 2030 on downstream energy products—such as petrochemical
products used in textile manufacturing—as part of the National In-
vestment Strategy, which seeks to diversify the economy away from
reliance on traditional crude oil exports, also detailed in the Saudi
national plan “Vision 2030.” 211 Since 2022, Saudi Arabia’s state oil
                                              358

company Saudi Aramco * has embarked on a campaign to sign ma-
jor investment deals in China toward achieving the stated goal of
converting four million bpd † of crude oil to chemical products by
2030.212
     Table 2: Recent Announced Investment between Saudi Aramco and
                            Chinese Partners

    Date of                 Chinese                     Planned
 Announcement               Company                    Investment                   Status
 April 22, 2024        Hengli                  Aramco to take 10 per-           Negotiations
                       Petrochemical           cent stake in company            ongoing
 January 2, 2024       Rongsheng               Cross-acquisition talks:         Negotiations
                       Petrochemical           Rongsheng to acquire 50          ongoing
                                               percent stake in Aramco
                                               Jubail Refinery Co.
                                               (SASREF), and Aramco
                                               to take max 50 percent
                                               stake in Rongsheng’s
                                               Ningbo Zhongjin Petro-
                                               chemical complex
 October 11, 2023      Shandong Yulong         Aramco to take 10 per-           Negotiations
                       Petrochemical Co.       cent stake in Shandong           ongoing
                                               Yulong
 September 27,         Shenghong               Aramco to take 10 per-           Negotiations
 2023                  Petrochemical           cent stake in company            ongoing
 March 27, 2023        Rongsheng               Aramco purchased 10              Completed in
                       Petrochemical Co.       percent stake for $3.4           July 2023
                                               billion (Aramco’s largest
                                               foreign acquisition
                                               ever) 213

 March 11, 2023        Huajin Aramco           $12 billion joint venture        Completed in
                       Petrochemical Co.       where Aramco holds a 30          March 2023
                       (HAPCO)                 percent stake
 Source: Fanny Zhang, “Saudi Aramco Eyes Stake in Hengli Petrochemical; Prowls for More
China Investments,” Independent Commodity Intelligence Services, April 23, 2024.


China Diversifies Energy Imports with Natural Gas Contracts
  China has steadily increased the portion of natural gas in its en-
ergy consumption profile, and in recent years it has inked long-term
contracts with top producers such as Qatar to guarantee supply over
the coming decades. In 2022, Chinese consumption of natural gas
stood at 364.6 billion cubic meters (bcm), the third largest behind
the United States (881 bcm) and Russia (408 bcm).‡ 214 Even though
China’s imports provide only a minority of the country’s gas con-
   * Saudi Aramco is the largest energy company in the world and one of the largest global com-
panies overall, with a market capitalization of $1.84 trillion. In 2023, the company reported
revenue of $440 billion and profit of $121 billion, down from a record $161 billion in 2022, which
was the largest ever by a publicly traded company. Julie Pinkerton, “The 10 Most Valuable Com-
panies in the World by Market Capitalization,” U.S. News, June 12, 2024; Jon Gambrell, “Aramco
Announces $121 Billion Profit in 2023, Saudi Oil Giant’s 2nd Highest on Record,” PBS News,
March 10, 2024.
   † In 2023, Saudi Aramco had an output of 12.8 million bpd. Jon Gambrell, “Aramco Announces
$121 Billion Profit in 2023, Saudi Oil Giant’s 2nd Highest on Record,” PBS News, March 10, 2024.
   ‡ China is estimated to have the sixth-largest proven natural gas reserves in the world at 297
trillion cubic feet (tcf), behind Russia (1,321 tcf), Iran (1,134 tcf), Qatar (871 tcf), the United
States (447 tcf), Turkmenistan (480 tcf), and ahead of Saudi Arabia (213 tcf). British Petroleum,
“BP Statistical Review of World Energy,” 2021, 34.
                                              359

sumption, it topped Japan as the number one importer of liquid
natural gas (LNG) in 2021, importing over 100 bcm that year before
falling back to the number two slot in 2022.215
   Positioned in the Persian Gulf atop the world’s largest natural gas
field, Qatar is one of the top exporters of LNG, consistently supply-
ing about 80 million metric tons to world markets annually.216 Qatar
was the second-largest source for LNG to China in 2023, supplying
16.7 million tons, or about a quarter of LNG imports.217 According
to testimony from Dr. Downs, this is set to increase following sepa-
rate deals signed in late 2022 and 2023 between QatarEnergy and
two Chinese state-owned energy giants, Sinopec and China National
Petroleum Corporation (CNPC).218
   Gas imports from Qatar will continue to play a critical role in
China’s natural gas mix. With consumption projected by Chinese
officials to increase, decision-makers in Beijing seek to expand do-
mestic production capacity while maintaining a stable and diver-
sified mix of imports from trusted suppliers.219 The 2023 Natural
Gas Development Report issued by China’s National Energy Admin-
istration (NEA), CNPC, and the State Council, among others, for the
first time specified the goal of continuing to meet above 50 percent
of demand with domestic supply.220 The 14th Five-Year Plan calls
for national storage capacity of 55 to 60 bcm by 2025, and Chi-
nese shipbuilders are increasing production of large LNG carriers
from 7 percent of global orders in 2021 up to 30 percent in 2022.221
Analysis coauthored by hearing witness Dr. Downs predicts China
will seek to secure a baseline of domestic production and pipeline
imports while maintaining the ability to dial up or dial down LNG
imports in response to global gas prices.222
 Figure 2: Chinese Imports of Crude Oil (2023) and Natural Gas (2022) by
                             Source Country




  Source: China’s General Administration of Customs; U.S. Energy Information Administration,
China, November 14, 2023.
  Note: Imports from Iran are not reported in official statistics, though it is estimated that Ira-
nian crude oil shipments were equivalent to those from Iraq for 2022, with large portions trans-
shipped and attributed to Malaysia, Oman, and the UAE.
                                              360

China Positions Itself on Clean Energy Investment
  China has become a leading manufacturer of clean energy tech-
nologies at the same time wealthy Gulf states aim to transition
their economies from dependence on fossil fuel exports, presenting
natural opportunities for increased integration of Chinese compa-
nies in the region.223 The International Energy Agency estimates
renewable energy capacity to grow by 62 gigawatts (GW) between
2023 and 2028 in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region,
more than three times the growth during the previous five-year pe-
riod.224 And an estimate by UBS Investment Bank projects total an-
nual energy-related trade between China and the region to increase
by $423 billion by the year 2030, with renewables accounting for
$77 billion of this additional trade.225
Nuclear
   Chinese construction companies have partnered with Gulf coun-
tries to build nuclear reactors. The UAE leads the region in adopting
nuclear power, with its multi-reactor Barakah power plant coming
partially online in 2020. The first nuclear power plant in the Arab
world, it is expected to meet up to 25 percent of the country’s daily
energy needs once fully operational.226 In May 2023, the Emirates
Nuclear Energy Corporation reached agreements with three Chi-
nese nuclear energy companies to support its nuclear energy pro-
gram, and Saudi Arabia is reportedly considering similar partner-
ships with China to build reactors capable of supplying 17 GWe * of
nuclear capacity by 2040.227
Batteries/Electric Vehicles
   Chinese automotive companies are rapidly expanding market
share in the region as adoption of electric vehicles (EVs) is set to
rise. The market for EVs in GCC countries is estimated to be $4.4
billion in 2024 and is expected to grow to $10.4 billion by 2029.228
Chinese carmakers of all types have made rapid inroads in the Gulf,
going from less than 1 percent market share for new vehicle sales
in 2017 to 12 percent in 2022, paving the way for expansion of EV
sales as adoption rates increase.229 In the UAE, Chinese EV sales
were up 92 percent year-over-year during the first five months of
2024, admittedly from a small base.230 China’s lithium battery ex-
ports have also accelerated in recent years to GCC countries, in-
creasing 26 percent year-over-year in 2022 and another 99 percent
in the first three quarters of 2023.231 In Israel—where the EV mar-
ket is projected to grow from $3 billion in 2023 to $12.9 billion by
2032—Chinese EVs accounted for 68 percent of all EV sales from
January to May of 2024.232
   Saudi Arabia has staked out a path to become an EV manufac-
turing hub, with the country’s largest sovereign wealth fund, Pub-
lic Investment Fund (PIF), taking a majority ownership position in
California-based luxury EV maker Lucid Motors in 2021, paving the
way for opening the first manufacturing facility in the country in
  * GWe is an abbreviation for “gigawatt electric,” a unit of electrical output equivalent to 1,000
megawatts or 1 billion watts. In 2022, 94 operable nuclear reactors in the United States had a
combined net capacity of 97.0 GWe, producing 18.6 percent of the country’s electricity; China had
56 reactors with a combined net capacity of 54.4 GWe, producing 5 percent of the country’s total
electricity. World Nuclear Association, “Nuclear Power in the World Today,” September 11 2024.
                                361

2023.233 The UAE has also moved to build an EV manufacturing
sector through collaboration with Chinese automakers.234 In Febru-
ary, it was reported that Shanghai-based carmaker Nio had agreed
to license its technology to Forseven, an EV startup owned and con-
trolled by Abu Dhabi investment fund CYVN Holdings.235 CYVN
Holdings became the single-largest shareholder in Nio after a $2.2
billion dollar investment in December 2023, bringing its stake in the
company to 20.1 percent.236 In July 2024, China’s largest EV maker
BYD agreed to a $1 billion deal to build a manufacturing plant in
Turkey that reportedly will produce 150,000 vehicles annually.237
(For more information on U.S.-China technology competition relat-
ing to battery technology, see Chapter 3, “U.S. China Competition in
Emerging Technologies.”)
Solar
  The Middle East is set to become a sizable market for Chinese
solar exports as countries scale up deployment of renewable ener-
gy. Solar photovoltaic (PV) is expected to account for 85 percent of
increased renewable energy capacity in the Middle East between
2023 and 2028.238 China’s Silk Road Fund has a 24 percent eq-
uity interest in the world’s largest solar energy plant in Dubai,
in partnership with the Dubai Electricity and Water Authority
(DEWA).239
Clean Hydrogen
  Nascent technology being funded by Gulf countries as part of their
national transition strategies presents collaborative opportunities
for Chinese companies in new energy systems. Riyadh-headquar-
tered ACWA Power is a private company that is a major developer
and operator of power generation and desalination plants across the
Middle East, including solar and green hydrogen projects.240 The
company has a number of partnerships and joint ventures with Chi-
nese guidance funds and state-owned enterprises, including the Silk
Road Fund, Power Construction Corporation of China, State Power
Investment Corporation, and Bank of China.241
Economic Statecraft
   Geographically positioned at a crossroads for global trade, the
Middle East has become a priority for Chinese transportation and
trade infrastructure investment in recent years. Every country in
the region except Israel and Jordan have signed a memorandum
of understanding (MOU) to participate in BRI.242 However, China’s
investments in the region extend beyond traditional development
finance and are intended to secure access to energy resources and
trade infrastructure like ports in key locations. In testimony before
the Commission, Karen Young, senior research scholar at Colum-
bia University’s Center on Global Energy Policy, described China’s
statecraft objective as follows: “The goal for China is not to be a
security umbrella, a regional alliance or solely to gain a market
for exports. China is after energy resources and strategic locations
for its trade and transport security, which means it is invested in
certain choke points in the Middle East, Horn of Africa, and Indian
Ocean.” 243
                                362

Port and Special Economic Zone Investments
  In efforts to become a preeminent trade and logistics hub for both
the European market and emerging markets in Asia and Africa,
Gulf countries have been expanding port infrastructure positioned
along strategic waterways. Chinese companies have been increas-
ingly involved in construction and operation of port infrastructure
throughout the region. Notable investments include:
  • Suez Canal (Egypt): Chinese private and state-owned compa-
    nies have signed numerous deals seeking to acquire operating
    concessions and ownership stakes in port and industrial activity
    along the Suez Canal, through which 12 percent of the world’s
    trade flows annually.244 The Tianjin Economic-Technological
    Development Area (TEDA) Suez Economic and Trade Cooper-
    ation Zone is a 176-square-mile industrial area built jointly by
    the governments of China and Egypt.245 The project was an-
    nounced in 2000, undergoing significant expansion in 2016 with
    substantial Chinese investment after being held up as a model
    BRI project.246 Last year, Chinese companies signed deals worth
    more than $8 billion to operate and manage assets in the Suez
    Canal Economic Zone.247 With respect to ports, Hong Kong-
    based Hutchison Ports invested more than $1.5 billion for up to
    38-year operating concessions in Egyptian ports, including oper-
    ation of a terminal at Abu Qir Naval Base.248 Shanghai-based
    COSCO Shipping Lines Co. acquired a 20 percent stake in East
    Port Said at the north end of the canal and a 25 percent stake
    in a terminal at Ain Sokhna Port on the south end.249
  • Port of Duqm (Oman): Strategically positioned near the Strait
    of Hormuz and the Bab-al-Mandeb, this port is owned by the
    Government of Oman and operated by a government entity.250
    The Chinese consortium Oman Wanfang committed to a $3.7
    billion investment over 30 years to build a Special Economic
    Zone.251
  • Port of Aden (Yemen): China Merchants Port Holdings is one of
    the firms involved in operations of this port.252
  • Khalifa Port (UAE): In 2021, U.S. intelligence agencies warned
    of suspected Chinese projects to construct military facilities at
    this port 50 miles north of Abu Dhabi.253 The UAE maintained
    that the construction carried out by COSCO was commercial in
    nature, though it announced it would halt the project shortly
    thereafter following stern warnings from U.S. officials.254 (For
    more on the potential use of dual-use facilities for military
    purposes, see “China’s Military and Security Presence in the
    Region” later in this chapter.) In 2024, the China Harbor Engi-
    neering Company was awarded a contract to upgrade the Ras al
    Khaimah Saqr Port, another UAE port north of Dubai.255
RMB and Alternative Payments Make Inroads, Albeit Minor
  China seeks to protect itself from exposure to potential future
U.S. sanctions and views energy markets and trade with countries
in the Middle East as one avenue through which it might dislodge
the U.S. dollar’s dominance in international finance. (For more on
                                 363

China’s efforts to create an alternative to the dollar-based trade
and financing system, see Chapter 7, “China’s New Measures for
Control, Mobilization, and Resilience.”) In the run-up to the 25-year
strategic partnership agreement signed in 2021, the central bank
of Iran listed the renminbi (RMB) as the Islamic Republic’s main
reserve currency.256 The adoption of the RMB by Iran for a sub-
stantial portion of its foreign exchange reserves and cross-border
payments is unique given the imposition of harsh sanctions ban-
ning Iranian banks from the SWIFT payment system since 2018.257
There are currently practical limits to these efforts, however. China
has pushed RMB-denominated oil contracts, cross-border payment
agreements, and currency swap lines with countries in the region,
most recently signing a three-year currency swap agreement with
Saudi Arabia worth nearly $7 billion.258 The currencies of all GCC
countries except Kuwait are pegged to the dollar, and this along
with China’s capital controls and the decades-old oil-for-security
partnership with the United States creates a strong incentive for
Arab Gulf countries to continue pricing their energy exports and
accruing foreign exchange reserves in dollars.259 According to testi-
mony from Dr. Downs before the Commission, no country in the re-
gion besides Iran has accepted RMB for payment for energy exports,
though Iraq and the UAE have both shown interest in introducing
the RMB for non-oil private sector cross-border payments.260
BRI and Development Finance Expands, Bucking Global
   Trend
   As China has pulled back development financing globally in re-
cent years, in the Middle East such investment has continued and
in some places increased (see also the “Digital Silk Road” section be-
low). Between 2005 and 2022, 266 projects were initiated across the
region under the umbrella of BRI, according to data collected by the
International Institute for Strategic Studies.261 With its extensive
oil reserves and participation in BRI, Iraq has become a top destina-
tion for Chinese energy and infrastructure investment.262 In 2021,
Iraq was the top recipient of BRI funding, receiving about $10.5 bil-
lion.263 Iraqi oil exports to China increased 47.5 percent from 2021
to 2022, and as of the start of this year, two-thirds of Iraq’s current
oil production is operated and overseen by Chinese companies.264
   The United States has coordinated a program to counter Chi-
na’s BRI and establish alternate trade routes through the Mid-
dle East. The Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Invest-
ment (PGII) was announced at the G7 summit in Japan in May
2023.265 Under the auspices of this framework, the United States,
India, the EU, France, Germany, Italy, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE
signed an MOU five months later to build two economic corridors
connecting South Asia and Europe via the Middle East, brand-
ed the India-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor (IMEC).266
The proposal calls for building rail and shipping lines to connect
existing infrastructure to move goods between India, the UAE,
Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Israel, and Europe.267 Telecommunications
lines, undersea cables, and a clean hydrogen pipeline are also
envisioned in the proposal.268
                                364

China-Middle East Technology Relations
  As the technology competition between the United States and
China has intensified, the Middle East is emerging as a key stake-
holder and potential conduit for Chinese end users to gain access
to leading-edge technology. Chinese technology companies have
had market presence in the region for decades and are working
to deploy telecommunications equipment and other underlying
technology infrastructure across the region in both wealthy and
underdeveloped countries. Emerging technologies like AI and ad-
vanced computing play a central role in the ambitious national
strategies of GCC countries as they seek to diversify their econo-
mies away from reliance on fossil fuel. Countries like Saudi Ara-
bia, the UAE, and Qatar have dedicated massive investment to
build up domestic technology industry and innovation hubs. As
demand for technology rises—including sensitive tech subject to
U.S. export restrictions—the United States and China will be in
competition for market access and network effects across the re-
gion.
Digital Silk Road
  The Middle East is integral to China’s Digital Silk Road (DSR),
a BRI initiative that seeks to entrench Chinese technology com-
panies in foreign markets and digital infrastructure.269 The no-
tion was first presented as the “information silk road” in a 2015
white paper outlining an expanded vision of BRI that would seek
to construct cross-border fiberoptic cables and telecommunication
networks, intercontinental underwater cables, and satellite infor-
mation channels.270 The DSR has since evolved to cover 5G cel-
lular infrastructure, cloud computing and data centers, smart city
technology, and e-commerce and digital payment services.271 Con-
sistent with its approach to BRI, China broadly defines DSR by
design in order to lump a range of overseas investment projects
and initiatives under the umbrella of a seemingly coherent devel-
opment strategy. Mohammed Soliman, director of the Middle East
Institute’s Strategic Technologies and Cyber Security Program,
observed, “By utilizing technology statecraft, Beijing aims to es-
tablish China’s geopolitical footprint in the region without resort-
ing to conventional military expansion.” 272 As of late 2023, at
least 17 countries have signed formal MOUs to join the DSR glob-
ally, among them Egypt, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE.273
                                                365
 Figure 3: China’s Economic and Technology Interests in the Middle East




                         TURKEY




                                    SYRIA

                   LEBANON
                                               IRAQ                           IRAN
                  ISRAEL     JORDAN

                                                           KUWAIT
                     Palestinian
                      Territories
                                                                    BAHRAIN
         EGYPT
                                                                       QATAR
                                            SAUDI ARABIA
                                                                          UNITED ARAB
                                                                            EMIRATES



                                                                                   OMAN
       BELT & ROAD INITIATIVE

       DIGITAL SILK ROAD

       ARMISTICE LINES                                     YEMEN

       PORT INVESTMENT
                                                                              LEBANON
                                                                                               SYRIA
       OIL OR GAS INVESTMENT

       5G CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS

       CHINESE SMART CITY SURVEILLANCE                                    ISRAEL
       TECHNOLOGY IN USE

       RMB SWAP LINES                                                                        JORDAN
                                                                              Palestinian
                                                                               Territories
                                                                       EGYPT


  Sources: Various.274
  Note: Smart City surveillance technology encompasses a variety of surveillance technologies
(such as CCTV cameras, recording and video management systems, and facial recognition) that
make data from a city’s core management systems available to government entities. For more see
Katherine Atha et al., “China’s Smart City Development,” SOS International LLC (prepared for
the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission), January 2020, 61.


Huawei and Others Deeply Embed in Technology Infrastructure
  Chinese telecommunications companies Huawei and ZTE have
moved aggressively to expand their presence in the Middle East and
developing countries more broadly since coming under scrutiny from
the United States and its allies and partners over data security
concerns.275 As of early 2023, Huawei had contracts with 11 Middle
Eastern countries to build out 5G infrastructure, including Egypt,
Turkey, Iran, Lebanon, Jordan, and all six GCC countries.276 Devel-
                                366

oping countries seeking to modernize their telecommunications net-
works have been attracted to the low-cost products offered by Huawei
and ZTE that still perform relatively well compared to equipment
from non-Chinese competitors.277 Huawei has been deeply involved
in Egypt for decades, establishing its North African headquarters
in Cairo in 1999.278 In 2018, Huawei and state-controlled Telecom
Egypt signed a $200 million financing agreement backed by the
Bank of China and China Export & Credit Insurance Corporation
(Sinosure) to fund the establishment of a national 4G network.279
And despite previous false starts, in 2024 Telecom Egypt secured
the exclusive license from the government worth $150 million to
provide 5G services enabled by Huawei technologies.280 Huawei has
signed similar agreements to collaborate on 5G buildout with Zain
in Saudi Arabia, Etisalat in the UAE, Turk Telekom in Turkey, and
VIVA in Kuwait.281
  Beyond cellular networks, Chinese firms have been involved in
the construction of another critical piece of the IT infrastructure
in the region: data centers. The Gulf still lags behind the United
States, Europe, and Asia in terms of total data centers and data
center capacity. Saudi Arabia currently has 60 data centers oper-
ating with 123 megawatts (MW) of capacity, while the UAE has
52 centers operating with 235 MW as of the end of 2023.282 For
comparison, as of 2022 Germany has 1,060 MW of data center
capacity, China has 4,818 MW, and the United States has 17,000
MW.283 However, both Saudi Arabia and the UAE are moving
to rapidly expand capacity. In late 2021, Saudi Arabia’s Minis-
try of Communications and Information Technology set a goal of
reaching 1,300 MW of data center capacity by 2030, and in the
UAE another 343 MW of capacity is currently planned or under
construction.284 Chinese companies Huawei, Lenovo, and Inspur
have served as IT infrastructure providers for equipment used
in data centers, and cloud service providers Alibaba and Tencent
have staked out operation of data facilities in both countries.285
(For a discussion of total compute, including cloud services, as a
key facet of U.S.-China technology competition in AI, see Chapter
3, “U.S.-China Competition in Emerging Technologies.”)
Emerging Technology
   The expanding collaborative regional innovation landscape
around emerging technologies like AI, advanced computing, and
biotechnology has increased the potential for transfer of cut-
ting-edge, dual-use technology. Wealthy Gulf states in particular
view increased technological linkages with China as an opportu-
nity to accelerate digital initiatives posited in economic diversi-
fication plans like Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030.286 Gulf sovereign
wealth funds have been major investors in tech startups around
the world for over a decade, yet now they have set goals to de-
velop domestic technology industries modeled on Silicon Valley
as part of their national diversification strategies.287 China may
be able to use its role as a partner in building these burgeoning
ecosystems to both expand its influence in the region and evade
export controls imposed by the United States and other Western
countries to obtain sensitive dual-use technology.
                                             367

Artificial Intelligence Opens New Front of Tech Competition
   Technology partnerships between Chinese companies of concern
and AI startups in the Middle East present a new vector of vulner-
ability of sensitive technology and data transfer.* The wealthy Arab
Gulf countries have made clear their ambition to become AI lead-
ers, allocating massive investment into planned construction of AI
infrastructure and regional innovation hubs. The consultancy PwC
estimates the economic contribution of AI will be 13.6 percent of
gross domestic product (GDP) in the UAE and 12.4 percent in Saudi
Arabia by 2030, behind only China and the United States.288 Of the
96 strategic goals included in Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030, some 70
percent involve using data and AI.289 The UAE stood up an Artifi-
cial Intelligence and Advanced Technology Council in January 2024
to guide AI policy, and the following month the country’s largest
listed firm, International Holding Co., appointed an AI chatbot to
an observer post on its board.290 The sheer amount of resources—
both capital and energy—required to build data processing capacity
that enables cutting-edge applications of AI are only accessible to a
handful of actors worldwide, yet they are two resources abundant in
Saudi Arabia, the UAE, and Qatar.
Gulf Sovereign Wealth Funds Make Big Bets on AI
   A frenzy of deal-making has commenced between Gulf funds and
AI companies in China and elsewhere since the launch of ChatGPT-3
in November 2022. Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund (PIF) was
the most active investor among the world’s sovereign wealth funds in
2023, investing $31.6 billion across 49 separate deals, an increase of 33
percent from 2022.291 As of March 2024, the PIF had $925 billion in as-
sets under management, up from $480 billion in 2022 and putting it on
track to meet its ambitious target of $2 trillion by 2030.292 Investing in
emerging technology has been a central pillar of the PIF’s strategy to
grow its portfolio and advance priorities outlined by Vision 2030.293 In
2017, the PIF was the top investor in the SoftBank Vision Fund—the
world’s largest technology venture capital fund—providing $45 billion
of the initial $100 billion in capital alongside other investors such as
Japan’s SoftBank, the Emeriti sovereign wealth fund Mubadala, Apple,
Foxconn, and Qualcomm.294 The Vision Fund has recently announced
it is pivoting toward strategic investment in AI and semiconductors,
with SoftBank executives pronouncing their size will enable them to
create an ecosystem of AI startups that can pool resources and rapidly
scale to outcompete other investors.295 Notable investment deals relat-
ing to China include:
  • Prosperity7 Ventures investment in Zhipu AI: In May 2024 the
     Financial Times reported that the technology venture capital
     division of Saudi Aramco called Prosperity7 had invested in
     Chinese generative AI startup Zhipu AI.296 Though details of
     the deal were not made public by either party, Prosperity7 was
     reportedly a minority investor in a $400 million funding round
     that valued Zhipu at roughly $3 billion.297 This is the first in-
     stance of a foreign investor backing a Chinese generative AI
   * For more on China’s ambitions in AI and the U.S.-China competition in the space, see Chapter
3, “U.S.-China Competition in Emerging Technologies.”
                                 368

    company endeavoring to rival industry leaders like OpenAI.298
    According to Gregory Allen, the director of the Center for Stra-
    tegic and International Studies Wadhwani Center for AI and
    Advanced Technologies, the deal also raises questions on wheth-
    er Zhipu will be able to access advanced compute powered by
    leading-edge semiconductors through operations in Saudi Ara-
    bia.299 Founded in 2019, Zhipu AI is one of the more notable
    startups in generative AI and first to secure Chinese govern-
    ment approval for roll-out of its products, with backing from
    Alibaba Group and Tencent.300
  • Alat partnerships in AI and semiconductor industry: Alat is a
    $100 billion investment firm launched by the PIF in February
    2024 with the stated mission of developing Saudi Arabia’s pro-
    duction and manufacturing of advanced technology industries,
    including AI and semiconductors.301 Since then it has announced
    a number of deals with Chinese companies, including a $2 bil-
    lion partnership with Lenovo to set up a regional headquarters
    and a new manufacturing base and a $200 million joint venture
    with surveillance company Dahua to develop its first overseas
    manufacturing operations.302 In recognition of the increasing-
    ly precarious position his firm occupies amid the intensifying
    U.S.-China technology competition, Alat CEO Amit Midha made
    clear that partnering with U.S. firms was a top priority, stating
    that the fund would be willing to unwind its Chinese invest-
    ments if asked by U.S. officials.303
U.S. Expands Technology Transfer Restrictions to Region
  Increased concern surrounding Chinese end users’ ability to by-
pass U.S. export controls through third countries has led to an ex-
pansion of the list of restricted markets for leading-edge products. In
October 2023, the Commerce Department expanded semiconductor
export controls to require licenses for sale of cutting-edge NVIDIA
and AMD chips to certain Middle Eastern countries, including the
UAE and Saudi Arabia, consistent with prior rules to prevent Chi-
nese military end use.304 In July 2023, the Financial Times reported
the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS)
was investigating a planned $3 billion investment by the Abu Dhabi
sovereign wealth fund Mubadala to buy a majority stake in New
York-based Fortress Investment Group over concerns of technology
transfer due to close ties between the emirate and China.305


  Group 42 Exemplifies Challenges and Possible Approach
               to Technological Disentanglement
   One of the leading AI companies in the Middle East moved to
 sever ties with Chinese firms in favor of expanded access to U.S.
 technology following pressure from both the Administration and
 Congress. Founded in 2018, Group 42 (G42) serves as a central
 conduit through which the UAE is implementing a broad set of
 technology initiatives, with a portfolio that spans AI, cloud com-
 puting, genomics, and self-driving vehicles.306 The company is
 backed by the sovereign wealth fund Mubadala Investment Co.
                                 369

  Group 42 Exemplifies Challenges and Possible Approach
         to Technological Disentanglement—Continued
 and chaired by Sheikh Tahnoon bin Zayed, national security ad-
 visor and brother to Abu Dhabi’s crown prince.
   In November 2023, the New York Times first reported on con-
 cerns raised by U.S. intelligence officials over G42’s extensive ties
 with Chinese companies, including underlying hardware provided
 by Huawei, cooperation with BGI on genetic sequencing, and a
 $100 million stake in ByteDance carried out by its $10 billion
 private equity investment arm 42XFund.307 High-level officials
 in the Administration reportedly told their Emirati counterparts
 that when it came to cutting-edge emerging technologies, the UAE
 needed to choose between partnership with the United States or
 China.308 In January 2024, the House Select Committee on the
 CCP called for the Commerce Department to make a determi-
 nation on whether G42 and its subsidiaries should be added to
 the Entity List due to potential transfer of dual-use technology
 to Chinese military end users.309 Prior to the Select Committee’s
 letter, G42’s CEO said in an interview that his company cannot
 work with both sides, and in February it had sold holdings in
 Chinese companies and broken ties with hardware suppliers, in-
 cluding Huawei.310
   Microsoft and G42 announced a $1.5 billion “strategic invest-
 ment” agreement in April 16, 2024, following “close consultation”
 with both the U.S. and Emirati governments.311 The deal afforded
 access to Microsoft cloud services for AI applications, a seat for
 Microsoft Vice Chair and President Brad Smith on the board of
 G42, and commitments by both parties to adhere to shared stan-
 dards on AI development and technology sharing in the develop-
 ing world.312 Mr. Soliman said in testimony before the Commis-
 sion that the agreement could serve as a model for engagement
 with the technology goals and companies of Middle East countries
 while establishing guardrails for U.S. technology and intellectual
 property in the region.313 The UAE’s ambassador to the Unit-
 ed States said after the deal that the two country’s governments
 were aligned in their vision for AI and would be “partners at
 the leading edge of advanced computing technologies.” 314 White
 House technology advisor Tarun Chhabra described the deal as
 generally positive, saying the United States has an interest in
 moving countries in the Middle East away from close ties with
 companies like Huawei.315

Smart Cities and Surveillance Technology
   The expertise of Chinese companies in deploying low-cost surveil-
lance technologies at scale has presented an enticing value propo-
sition for authoritarian regimes seeking innovative ways to tighten
state control. The collective term “smart cities” commonly refers to
the application of digital technologies in an urban setting to collect
and analyze data in order to optimize municipal management and
services.316 While smart city technology can greatly improve effi-
ciency and accelerate development in emerging market economies, it
                                  370

also raises concerns over privacy and the export globally of China’s
repressive mass surveillance model used in Xinjiang Province and
elsewhere throughout the country.317
   Digital transformation of society has become a central pillar of the
national diversification strategies of wealthy Gulf nations like Saudi
Arabia, the UAE, and Qatar, who partner with a variety of foreign
technology firms and providers of smart city technology.318 Accord-
ing to the 2023 Smart City Index, a ranking of 141 cities along a
variety of infrastructure and technology metrics, Abu Dhabi placed
13th in the world, Dubai 17th, and Riyadh 30th.319 Projects under
development like Saudi Arabia’s planned futuristic city NEOM on
the Red Sea intend to expand the integration of data to ease friction
in daily life of residents, with city planners stating that the city will
make use of 90 percent of collectible data, in comparison to current
smart cities that typically utilize around 1 percent.320 Huawei has
signed contracts to provide cloud services for NEOM, as has Chinese
AI company SenseTime.321 In early 2024, Saudi fund Alat (a subsid-
iary of the PIF) announced a $200 million partnership with Dahua
Technology, a leading Chinese surveillance equipment maker that
was added to the Commerce Department’s Entity List in 2022 for
its role in surveillance of Uyghurs.322 Elsewhere in the region, Chi-
nese technology is being embedded in Egypt’s New Administrative
Capital, a planned city for 6.5 million residents under construction
with sizable contribution from China State Construction Engineer-
ing Corporation (CSCEC).323 Furthermore, in both Qatar and the
UAE, Huawei is involved in new smart city development projects.324
China’s Military and Security Presence in the
  Middle East
   China has slowly been expanding its security footprint in the Mid-
dle East. It has built a military outpost in the region, is carrying out
counterpiracy activities, participating in peacekeeping operations,
and conducting military exercises and port calls with regional part-
ners. Some analysts argue that China may view dual-use ports as a
potential way to expand its security options in the region, as well.
Although its military presence in the region remains limited and it
has shown little interest in playing a larger role in regional secu-
rity, these activities allow Beijing to bolster the PLA’s operational
experience and its reputation as a security partner. Lastly, China is
targeting customers in the Middle East arms market, particularly
through the sale of drones, to establish itself as an alternative op-
tion to the United States and Russia.
PLA Activities in the Middle East Boost Operational
     Experience
   China’s military footprint in the Middle East is relatively small at
present, especially compared to the United States’ presence, but it
enables China to gain operational experience and could lay the foun-
dation for a larger military presence in the region in the future.325
In recent years, one of China’s top military objectives in the region
has been protecting its investments.326 Toward this end, China has
deployed PLA assets to participate in UN peacekeeping efforts, and
it has potentially begun scoping locations for formal military bases
                                              371

and commercial ports where the PLA Navy can dock its ships.327
The PLA’s efforts to operate more frequently in the Middle East
could enhance China’s efforts to project power and compete with
the U.S. military on a global scale.328 At this point in time, though,
Chinese military operations in the region are marginal compared to
those of the United States.
China Could Expand Basing Footprint in the Future
   Though there are currently no official Chinese military bases in
the Middle East, a logistics facility in Djibouti already serves as a
PLA military outpost, supporting regional military operations and
representing a potential model for expanding its security footprint
in the future.329 While the Djibouti installation is China’s only of-
ficial military outpost, Beijing could establish similar facilities in
the future.* 330 A 2022 report on China’s global basing ambitions
by RAND Corporation researchers Cristina L. Garafola, Stephen
Watts, and Kristin J. Leuschner analyzed the desirability and fea-
sibility of potential PLA basing and access locations, assessing that
countries including Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
and the UAE were likely highly desirable locations for PLA bas-
ing and access points, although the feasibility of these varied.331
The U.S. Department of Defense’s 2023 report on Military and Se-
curity Developments Involving the PRC notes that China “probably
also has considered other countries as locations for PLA military
logistics facilities,” including the UAE.332 Additionally, according to
a 2020 study written for the Commission by the open source in-
telligence company Jane’s, two of the 18 sites that could serve as
potential overseas PLA bases are located in the Middle East (both
in Oman).333
   Some analysts have argued that whether or not it adds actual
bases, China may be able to rely on access to critical infrastruc-
ture in the Middle East as a way of expanding its power projection
capabilities in the region.334 Grant Rumley, the Meisel-Goldberg-
er fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, argues
that China will likely continue to augment its security presence
in the Middle East through “a combination of modest military
deployments and investments in critical infrastructure.” 335 Chi-
na’s 2016 National Defense Transportation Law gives the PLA
legal authority to commandeer civilian facilities, such as ports,
in times of crisis.336 As noted by Conor Kennedy, an assistant
professor at the China Maritime Studies Institute, the 2016 law
requires Chinese transportation enterprises overseas to provide
logistical support for PLA forces operating overseas.337 PLA ex-
perts have discussed the importance of “strategic strongpoints,”
a term that “generally refers to potential dual-use overseas fa-
cilities, including foreign commercial ports over which the PRC
   * China primarily uses its Djibouti base to conduct antipiracy and freedom of navigation activi-
ties that are aimed at securing trade corridors in the region. The PLA Navy has utilized Djibouti
as a logistics hub for its anti-piracy missions in the Gulf of Aden since 2008, and evacuated Chi-
nese and foreign civilians there in 2015 during a surge of violence in Yemen, after which China
and Djibouti reached an agreement to build a permanent base in January 2016. Mordechai Chazi-
za, “China’s Military Base in Djibouti,” Begin-Sadat Center for Strategic Studies, August 2018;
China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hong Lei’s Regular Press
Conference on January 21, 2016, January 21, 2016. Sam Lagrone, “U.S. AFRICOM Commander
Confirms Chinese Logistics Base in Djibouti,” U.S. Naval Institute, November 25, 2015.
                                            372

expects to exert some degree of control” and that are primarily
useful for peacetime operations, “enabling PLA Navy port calls,
joint exercises, and antipiracy operations in distant theaters.” 338
A host country’s willingness to support the PLA’s operations
is more important than Chinese law, however, as longstanding
U.S. experience demonstrates significant constraints imposed
by host countries, particularly during times of increased global
tensions.339 In the Middle East, Chinese firms have port operat-
ing agreements with Egypt, Israel, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia,
Turkey, and the UAE.* 340 (See “Port and Special Economic Zone
Investments” above for a more detailed discussion of certain Chi-
nese port-related investments in the region.)
Beijing Leverages Counterpiracy Task Force to Gain
    Experience Operating Overseas
   While China has used antipiracy operations in the Middle East
to protect its trade and gain operational experience, these oper-
ations do not seem connected to aforementioned regional efforts
dealing with Houthi rebels. In December 2008, China responded
to the rise in piracy in the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden, primarily
from Somalia, by dispatching a Naval Escort Task Force (NETF),
or counterpiracy task force, to the Gulf of Aden.341 The NETF has
mostly sustained the same configuration of vessels: two surface
combatants and a refueling ship, although the task force has oc-
casionally augmented its presence with other capabilities such
as the Song-class diesel-electric submarine.342 Since 2008, China
has maintained its counterpiracy missions, gaining operational
experience and escorting a number of commercial ships through
the Red Sea.343 Chinese state media claims that since 2008, the
PLA Navy has escorted more than 7,000 commercial ships.344 Ac-
cording to an August 2024 report by independent analyst Dennis
J. Blasko, since December 2008, the PLA Navy has deployed 46
counterpiracy escort task forces to the Gulf of Aden on a UN-au-
thorized mission.345 Mr. Blasko asserts that until recently, the
PLA Navy had normally dispatched three task forces per year at
roughly four-month intervals, but the 45th and 46th task forces
departed from China on five-month intervals, potentially indi-
cating a shift in deployment patterns.346 Mr. Blasko states that
the more onerous requirements for its surface fleet in operations
around Taiwan and the South China Sea may be forcing the PLA
Navy to draw forces away from the Gulf of Aden mission, while it
also may be possible that the PLA Navy is trying to keep its ships
clear of waters threatened by Houthi terrorists.347




   * According to Isaac B. Kardon, a senior fellow for China studies at the Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace, Chinese firms partially owned or operated 20 ports in the Middle East
and North Africa region as of February 2020. These ports may allow the PLA Navy to perform
valuable military functions for logistics, intelligence, and communications without the estab-
lishment of formal PLA facilities and permissions. Isaac B. Kardon, written testimony for the
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Military Power Pro-
jection and U.S. National Interests, February 20, 2020, 2, 13.
                                               373
  Figure 4: China’s Diplomatic and Military Activity in the Middle East




                           TURKEY




                                      SYRIA
                 LEBANON

                  ISRAEL*                     IRAQ                         IRAN
                               JORDAN


                       Palestinian                    KUWAIT
                        Territories


        EGYPT                                                  BAHRAIN

                                                             QATAR          UNITED ARAB
                                                                             EMIRATES
                                              SAUDI ARABIA


      COMPREHENSIVE STRATEGIC                                                   OMAN
      PARTNERSHIP

      STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIP+

      FRIENDLY COOPERATIVE
      PARTNERSHIP
                                                       YEMEN
      INNOVATIVE COMPREHENSIVE
      PARTNERSHIP
      ARMISTICE LINES                                                     LEBANON
      BILATERAL MILITARY EXERCISES                                                        SYRIA
      WITH CHINA SINCE 2013
      MULTILATERAL MILITARY EXERCISES
      WITH CHINA SINCE 2013
                                                                       ISRAEL*
      PORT CALLS WITH CHINA SINCE 2013

      CHINESE DRONE SALES TO THE                                                        JORDAN
      MIDDLE EAST SINCE 2013
                                                                         Palestinian
      +CHINA ALSO MAINTAINS A STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIP                       Territories
       WITH THE PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY                                EGYPT



 Source: Various.348


  Despite the NETF’s longstanding presence, the PLA Navy has ig-
nored distress calls from commercial vessels under attack in the
Red Sea in contravention of customary and international maritime
law, content to free-ride on U.S.-led international counterpiracy op-
erations.349 For instance, in November 2023, a Liberian-flagged ves-
sel targeted by Iran-aligned Houthi rebels with missiles put out an
SOS call in the Gulf of Aden, but the three PLA Navy vessels in
the area did not respond.350 Despite being heavily reliant on access
to and safe transit of the Red Sea for trade with Middle Eastern
partners, Chinese leaders continue to avoid any outright critique
of the Houthis.351 At a January 2023 press conference in Cairo, for
example, Minister Wang simply called for an end to the attacks on
                                               374

civilian ships and for the resumption of smooth trade flows, without
mentioning the terrorist group.352 Instead, China continues to bene-
fit from the activities of the U.S.-led task force Operation Prosperity
Guardian * to safeguard shipping lanes against attacks by Houthi
rebels.† 353

           Chinese Maritime Shipping Free-Rides on
                      U.S.-Provided Security
   The spillover from the conflict in Gaza has highlighted the
 limits of China’s willingness to play an active security role in
 the region.354 As noted above, although China has participat-
 ed in counterpiracy patrols in the Gulf of Aden since 2008, it
 has avoided participating in efforts to protect Red Sea shipping
 lanes as the threat of Houthi attacks forces ships to reroute.355
 The fallout has been particularly harmful to Egypt, where Chi-
 na has billions of dollars’ worth of loans and investments.356
 While Minister Wang called for the end to the “harassment of
 civilian ships in the Red Sea” in January, he also said strikes on
 Yemen were unauthorized by the UN and that the crisis was a
 “spillover of the conflict in Gaza.” 357 U.S. officials have pressed
 China to influence Iran into discouraging Houthi attacks, with
 China reportedly doing so in January 2024 following meetings
 between U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken, U.S. National
 Security Advisor Jake Sullivan, and head of the CCP’s Interna-
 tional Department Liu Jianchao.358 China reportedly discussed
 the matter with Iran at meetings in Beijing and Tehran in
 January 2024.359 Still, China’s lack of material support for the
 U.S. effort to keep shipping lanes safe for all commercial tran-
 sits may stem from the fact that in March 2024 China and
 Russia reportedly made a deal with the Houthis to refrain from
 attacking their ships.‡ 360 Chinese ships had reportedly been
 signaling their identity to avoid attack in previous months, al-
 though one was struck in what was likely a mistake.361 Chi-
 na has maintained a stance of neutrality between the Yemeni
 government and its Saudi Arabian supporters, and the Houthis
 and their Iranian backers.362

   * China is balancing its need to protect Chinese commercial vessels with its response to the Is-
rael-Palestine conflict. As a result, China has not joined the U.S.-led Operation Prosperity Guard-
ian coalition to help protect commercial traffic in the Red Sea. The coalition includes Bahrain,
Britain, Canada, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Seychelles, and Spain. Zhao Ziwen and
Jevans Nyabiage, “Why Hasn’t China Joined US-Led Naval Force against Houthi Rebel Attacks
in Red Sea?” South China Morning Post, December 27, 2023; Phelim Kine, “Beijing Shrugs at U.S.
Call for Help Protecting Red Sea Shipping,” Politico, December 21, 2023.
   † Chinese state media has attempted to undermine the credibility of the task force and question
its motives. For instance, Xinhua, a state-run media outlet, claimed in a December 2023 article
that “many allies are unwilling to publicly announce their joining, or even to get involved at all.”
The same article asserted that the task force is an attempt by the United States “to get its allies
to share the escort costs, or even drag its allies into the conflict.” Xinhua, “Awkward! United
States Organizes ‘Red Sea Escort,’ Few Respond” (尬! 美国搞 “红海护航”应者寥寥), December 30,
2023. Translation.
   ‡ Mr. Rumley stated in his testimony before the Commission that Chinese commercial ships
have been relatively safe, with only one Houthi attack taking place in March 2024. Mr. Rumley
said that aside from this attack, “Chinese commercial vessels have not been purposely targeted
by the Houthis since November 2023.” Grant Rumley, written testimony before U.S.-China Eco-
nomic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024,
11–12; Heather Mongilio, “Chinese Tanker Hit with Houthi Missile in the Red Sea,” USNI News,
March 24, 2024.
                                             375

Beijing Seeks to Use Peacekeeping Operations to Bolster Its
     Image as a Contributor to Regional Security
   China participates in various UN peacekeeping operations that
are intended to bolster its image and provide PLA personnel with
overseas military experience.363 China has participated in UN
peacekeeping operations for more than three decades, primarily de-
ploying peacekeepers to African countries where China has signif-
icant investments.* 364 In the Middle East, China maintains more
than 400 peacekeepers, almost all of whom are in south Lebanon
supporting the UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).† 365 Chinese
peacekeepers in Lebanon conduct trainings and exercises with UNI-
FIL, which may give them insight into the training practices of mil-
itaries from other countries and help them hone skills that could be
used in operations elsewhere.366 For instance, in February 2023, a
deputy captain within China’s peacekeeping team told Chinese state
media that their recent UNIFIL exercise had focused on defending
their base camp, rescue operations, psychological counseling, and
the resettlement of people.367 According to China’s Ministry of For-
eign Affairs, Chinese peacekeepers in Lebanon also provide medical
assistance to the locals, helping to boost China’s image in the coun-
try and among other UN member states.368 As of late June 2024,
China also has five military observers in Israel who have joined the
UN Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO).369 The UNTSO was
established in 1948 during the Arab-Israeli War as the UN’s first-ev-
er peacekeeping operation and helps maintain a ceasefire and su-
pervise the application of the armistice agreements.‡ 370
Joint Exercises and Port Calls Help Build Operational
    Experience and Military Image
  In recent years, China has conducted joint military exercises with
and made port calls to several Middle Eastern countries, including
both U.S. partners and adversarial states like Iran, in order to gain
operational experience and build the PLA’s image. At the first Chi-
na-Arab States Summit in Riyadh in December 2022, General Secre-
tary Xi delivered a speech to the 21 members of the Arab League in
which he proposed “eight major initiatives on China-Arab practical
cooperation,” including an “initiative on security and stability.” § 371
  * China had a large peacekeeping presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where it
has carried out mining operations, as well as South Sudan, where a Chinese oil company was
part of a consortium that extracted South Sudan’s oil. China has also placed peacekeeping forces
in Mali and Liberia to protect critical infrastructure projects and Chinese-funded enterprises,
respectively. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2020 Annual Report to Con-
gress, December 2020, 174–175.
  † UNIFIL was created by the UN Security Council in March 1978 to confirm Israeli withdrawal
from Lebanon and to assist the Lebanese government in restoring its effective authority in the
area. In 2006, China sent its first peacekeeping contingent to UNIFIL. Comparatively, Indonesia
has 1,232 peacekeepers and India has 894. The United States does not currently have any peace-
keepers in Lebanon. United Nations Peacekeeping, “Troop and Police Contributions,” March 31,
2024; China Military Online, “First Batch of 22nd Chinese Peacekeeping Force to Lebanon Sets
Off,” December 8, 2023; United Nations, “UNIFIL, Lebanon.”
  ‡ The United States currently has two peacekeepers at UNTSO, while Finland and Switzerland
have the most, at 14 and 13 peacekeepers, respectively. United Nations Peacekeeping, “Troop and
Police Contributions,” September 18, 2024.
  § Chinese state media said the initiative will focus on strengthening strategic dialogues be-
tween the defense departments and military forces of China and the partner countries; con-
ducting exchanges between military units and academies; deepening cooperation on maritime
security, international peacekeeping and “professional techniques”; and expanding joint exercises
and training. As part of this initiative, China will train 1,500 personnel from partner countries
in fields such as smart policing and cyber security law enforcement, implement the China-League
                                             376

During the inaugural summit, all sides agreed to further cooperation
between their militaries, including in joint exercises.372 According
to Mr. Rumley, some of China’s exercises and port calls appear to be
more symbolic than practical, while others are more sophisticated
and have led to reciprocal exercises in China.373 Mr. Rumley asserts
that China’s exercises with Middle East partners are “designed to
showcase the capabilities of the Chinese military, build up PLA ex-
perience, and improve China’s image as a security partner.” 374
  In recent years, China conducted several military exercises with
Arab countries that seek in part to improve China’s operational ex-
perience and military image:
  • UAE: In August 2023, China and the UAE held their first joint
    exercise, Falcon Shield 2023, in Xinjiang.375 Associate professor
    at the Near East South Asia Center for Security Studies David
    Des Roches describes the joint exercise as an “unfortunate de-
    velopment” and suggests that the UAE is trying to demonstrate
    to the United States that it has alternative options for securi-
    ty partners.376 The most recent iteration of the training exer-
    cise took place in July 2024, again in Xinjiang.377 During both
    exercises, the UAE deployed its Dassault Mirage 2000-9DAD/
    EAD fighters, an aircraft also operated by Taiwan’s air force,
    potentially giving the PLA Air Force an opportunity to gather
    information on its capabilities.378
  • Saudi Arabia: China has also conducted joint naval exercises with
    Saudi Arabia, referred to as the Blue Sword exercises.379 The first
    edition of the Blue Sword exercises was held in 2019 near Saudi
    Arabia’s Jeddah port, and the second edition was held in 2023 in
    Zhanjiang, China, at a naval brigade camp.380 Following the most
    recent event, Chinese media suggested these exercises were now
    “routine” and offered both countries an opportunity to learn from
    each other’s strengths, highlighting that China’s military training
    system is different from Saudi Arabia’s Western-style training doc-
    trine.381 The exercises focus on counterpiracy operations, including
    basic training, professional training, and exercises involving simu-
    lated rescue operations.* 382
  • Iran: China has also participated in military exercises with Iran.
    Most recently, in March 2024, China conducted naval drills with
    Iran and Russia in the Gulf of Oman.383 These exercises began
    in 2018 and are in their sixth iteration, but the 2024 iteration
    was the first time other countries, including Oman, Pakistan,
    India, and others, have been allowed to observe.384 Mr. Rumley
    notes that China’s exercise with Iran and Russia is one example
    of Beijing focusing on a more symbolic rather than practical op-
    eration.385 During the exercise, the three militaries conducted a
    hostage rescue drill and tactical maneuvering drills.386
of Arab States Cooperation Initiative on Data Security, establish a network information exchange
mechanism, and strengthen exchanges and dialogues in data governance and cyber security. Xin-
hua, “Xi Proposes Eight Major Initiatives on China-Arab Practical Cooperation,” China Daily,
December 10, 2022.
   * Basic training and professional training involve things like underwater searches, rappelling
from helicopters, and practice shooting various weapons. Seong Hyeon Choi, “Chinese and Saudi
Navies Launch Joint Counterterrorism Exercise against Backdrop of Israel-Hamas War,” South
China Morning Post, October 10, 2023.
                                              377

China’s Growing Role in the Middle Eastern Arms Market
  Although it is a relatively small supplier of arms to the Middle
East relative to the United States,* China has sought to create
deeper inroads into Middle Eastern countries through the transfer
of arms and dual-use technologies in order to establish itself as an
alternative security partner in the region.387 China has attempt-
ed to compete in this market due to its relatively low-cost options,
affordable services, and a lack of geopolitical conditions placed on
sales, among other factors.388 In particular, China has stood out as
an exporter of military drones to countries such as Saudi Arabia
and the UAE.389
China Targets Middle East as Market for Arms Sales
   China’s sale of arms and dual-use technologies in the Middle East
simultaneously serves its own commercial interests and strengthens
its position as an alternative regional security partner at the Unit-
ed States’ expense. In the last decade, China has begun to refocus
arms exports to the Middle East.† 390 Notably, China’s 2016 Arab
Policy Paper called for increased cooperation between China’s mil-
itary and Arab countries and to “deepen cooperation on weapons,
equipment and various specialized technologies, and carry out joint
military exercises.” 391 General Michael Kurilla, the commander of
U.S. Central Command, told the Senate Armed Services Committee
in March 2023 that China’s arms sales to the Middle East had in-
creased by 80 percent over the previous ten years.392 Still, China’s
arms sales to the region—and globally—remain low relative to the
United States and other arms exporters.‡ 393
   China markets aircraft as well as air and missile defense, an-
ti-tank, and anti-drone systems in the region. For example, in Febru-
ary 2024, 36 Chinese companies, including China North Industries
Corporation and China National Aero-Technology Import and Ex-
port Corporation, attended the World Defense Show in Saudi Arabia
to market their services.394 Chinese companies displayed fighter jet
models, long-range air and missile defense systems, and anti-tank
systems, among other equipment.395 The PLA Air Force also demon-
strated J-10 fighter jets—the first time China has displayed them
at an international expo.396 No new deals were publicly announced
in 2024 for Chinese fighter jet purchases, but in 2023 the UAE gov-
ernment signed a deal to purchase 12 Chinese L-15A advanced jet
trainers.397 In 2022, China delivered the Silent Hunter air defense
system to Saudi Arabia.398 This is an anti-drone weapons system
intended to protect Saudi Arabia against loitering munitions and
   * According to data from the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, the United
States constituted the largest share of arms export to the Middle East between 2019 and 2023,
accounting for 38 percent of total exports. Pieter D. Wezeman et al., “Trends in International
Arms Transfers, 2023,” Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, March 2024, 3.
   † China’s arms exports to the region have varied over time; in 1986, it sent almost 95 percent
of its arms exports to Middle East countries, but this percentage dropped significantly throughout
the 1990s and early 2000s as China reoriented its arms sales to Asian customers. Maria Mary Pa-
pageorgiou, “China’s Growing Presence in the Middle East’s Arms Race and Security Dynamics,”
Springer Nature Switzerland, 2023, 263–265; China Power Project, “How Dominant Is China in
the Global Arms Trade?” Center for Strategic and International Studies, May 27, 2021.
   ‡ Between 2019 and 2023, three of the top ten arms importers were in the Middle East: Saudi
Arabia, Qatar, and Egypt. The United States remains the top supplier of arms to the region,
followed by France, Italy, and Germany. Pieter D. Wezeman, et al., “Trends in International Arms
Transfers, 2023,” Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, March 2024, 11.
                                            378

Iran-backed Houthi drones.399 In 2017, the UAE purchased Blue
Arrow 7 anti-tank missiles from China to arm its Wing Loong-2
drone fleet.400 China delivered these purchases to the UAE in 2020,
and the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute estimates
there were around 500 missiles in the delivery.401
China Has Emerged as the Main Supplier of Military-Grade Drones
     in the Middle East
   China has positioned itself as the primary supplier of drones to
the region, including to longstanding U.S. security partners Saudi
Arabia and the UAE.402 Maria Papageorgiou, a lecturer at the Uni-
versity of Exeter, testified before the Commission that between 2016
and 2020, China’s arms sales to Saudi Arabia increased by 386 per-
cent and to the UAE by 169 percent.403 During this period, the main
types of weapons purchased from China were drones, specifically the
Wing Loong-1 and the Wing Loong-2 (see Table 3 below).404 Sau-
di Arabia is also expected to receive the Wing Loong-10, a high-al-
titude drone capable of carrying several munitions, sometime in
2024.405 In April 2024, Iraq received a delivery of Caihong-5 (CH-5)
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs).406 According to news reports, the
Iraqi Army Aviation Command had expressed interest in acquiring
CH-5 drones since April 2023.407 China’s CH-5 drones can carry
heavier payloads and have a longer range and endurance life than
their predecessors (CH-4s).408 These features could allow for more
effective strike missions or intelligence gathering.409

 Table 3: Chinese Military-Grade UAVs Sold to Middle Eastern Countries
                               (2010–2023)

                                                             Year      Number
    Country            UAV Design           Manufacturer    Ordered    Ordered
Iraq                 CH-4                  CASC            2014       20*
Saudi Arabia         CH-4                  CASC            2014*      20*

Jordan               CH-4                  CASC            2015*      6*

Egypt                ASN-209               CATIC           2010*      18

UAE                  CR-500                NORINCO         2019*      10*

UAE                  Wing Loong-1          CADI/AVIC       2011*      25*

Saudi Arabia         Wing Loong-1          CADI/AVIC       2014*      15*

Egypt                Wing Loong-1          CADI/AVIC       2016*      10*
Egypt                Wing Loong-1          CADI/AVIC       2018       32*
Saudi Arabia         Wing Loong-2          CADI/AVIC       2017       50*
UAE                  Wing Loong-2          CADI/AVIC       2017       15*

Saudi Arabia         CH-4                  CASC            2017       5*

Iraq                 CH-5                  CASC            2023*      Unclear

 Note: Values with an asterisk are estimates.
 Source: Various.410
                                 379

   Chinese military drones are more accessible to foreign militaries,
as they are priced at roughly half the cost or less of their U.S. coun-
terparts.411 Dr. Papageorgiou suggests that the Gulf states in par-
ticular are attracted to Chinese armed drones because of their lower
cost.412 Although Chinese drones are typically of a lesser quality, the
lower price point allows countries in the region to purchase them
in larger quantities—an advantage in conflict zones where they can
be quickly shot down.413 Additionally, Mr. Rumley explains that re-
gional actors are incentivized to buy Chinese armed drones because
it will give them access to Chinese drone technology.414 According
to the U.S. Department of Defense, China entices countries in the
Middle East to buy its weapons systems, especially drones, by offer-
ing flexible payment options, gifts, and donations to the purchasing
country.415
Implications for the United States
   The Middle East continues to be a volatile region where factional
and sectarian conflict can quickly spill over and threaten the secu-
rity and commercial interests of the United States and its allies and
partners. While China does not yet appear intent on replacing the
United States as the dominant outside power in the region, it acts
opportunistically to undermine U.S. influence. China’s approach to
the region is mixed, seeking to strike a balance between undertak-
ing efforts that may undermine the influence of the United States
while maintaining a threshold of stability necessary to ensure un-
abated commercial activity. China may also believe that it benefits if
continued regional turmoil deflects some U.S. energy and attention
away from its own immediate periphery. However, China’s substan-
tial economic and commercial interests in the region, and its reli-
ance on key trade routes that pass through it, leave it exposed to
potential disruption if a significant conflict among regional powers
were to break out.
   Diplomatically, the Middle East presents an opportunity for China
to promote its vision of global leadership. First, China is developing
deeper relations with both U.S. partners and rivals in the region.
Second, Beijing uses its three initiatives, the Global Security Initia-
tive, Global Development Initiative, and Global Civilization Initia-
tive, to engage Arab states and to present an alternative vision that
appeals to the region’s autocratic governments. Lastly, China uses
multilateral forums, such as the China-Arab States Cooperation Fo-
rum, to spread narratives and gain support for issues such as its
human rights abuses in Xinjiang or bolster its territorial claims in
the South China Sea or Taiwan.
   Iran is also a crucial element of China’s efforts to undermine the
United States and the rules-based international order it leads. Chi-
na and Iran harbor a shared sense of grievance toward the U.S.-
led world order. By sustaining Iran—and, indirectly, its proxy forces
throughout the region—Beijing complicates the security landscape
for the United States and supports an effective counterweight to
rising regional powers on the Arabian Peninsula. Chinese purchas-
es of sanctioned Iranian crude oil have increased dramatically in
recent years, to the point where China now purchases nearly 90
percent of Iranian oil and in doing so has established a network of
                                  380

logistical and financial institutions to bypass U.S. and international
sanctions regimes against Iran.416 This evolving and increasingly
sophisticated sanctions circumvention scheme is eroding the eco-
nomic leverage the United States and the international community
can bring to bear not only to contain Iran but also to use against
other adversarial states like Russia and North Korea, who together
with China are forming what researchers at the Atlantic Council
have dubbed the “axis of evasion.” 417 However, China’s partnership
with Iran has limits, as China acts exploitatively to purchase Irani-
an oil that cannot easily be sold to other buyers due to sanctions at
below-market prices, all while signaling Beijing’s unwillingness to
enmesh too deeply for fear of souring relations with Saudi Arabia,
the UAE, and other important actors.418
   Another area of increasing concern for the United States pertains
to China’s ability to acquire cutting-edge U.S. technology subject to
export controls given the presence of Chinese technology companies
in the region’s digital infrastructure, particularly in the Arab Gulf.
Huawei, ZTE, and other companies on the Commerce Department’s
Entity List have been instrumental in the buildout of telecommu-
nications and cloud infrastructure across the region. With the rapid
advent of generative AI and the ambition of Saudi Arabia, the UAE,
and other wealthy Gulf states to become AI leaders, there is acceler-
ating demand for dual-use hardware and software supplied by lead-
ing tech companies. In October 2023, the Commerce Department
expanded semiconductor export controls to require licenses for sale
of cutting-edge chips to certain Middle Eastern countries, including
the UAE and Saudi Arabia, consistent with prior rules to prevent
Chinese military end use.419 Microsoft and the UAE’s leading AI
firm Group 42 reached a landmark agreement in April 2024 that
followed the latter’s commitment to untangle ties with Chinese tech
companies, including Huawei. This case is informative regarding
how best to incentivize key partners with whom the United States
maintains close security relationships to effectively constrict poten-
tial conduits of technology transfer to China.
   Lastly, though China maintains a modest maritime security pres-
ence in the Middle East operating out of its base in Djibouti, it has
yet to forward-deploy the forces necessary to conduct military oper-
ations that could rival the U.S. security architecture in the region. It
appears for now that Beijing is content to free-ride off the security
that U.S. counterpiracy operations, counterterrorism operations, and
broader security partnerships provide in the region. China may also
be considering options for new bases in the region; for example, the
U.S. Department of Defense asserted in 2023 that China has proba-
bly considered the UAE for a PLA logistics facility.420 This and sim-
ilar port construction projects undertaken by Chinese companies in
areas of strategic importance should be closely monitored, as should
arms sales and increasing military ties between the PLA and coun-
tries in the region.
                                         381
                        ENDNOTES FOR CHAPTER 5
    1. Adam Gallagher, Sarhang Hamasaeed, and Garrett Nada, “What You Need to
Know about China’s Saudi-Iran Deal,” United State Institute of Peace, March 16,
2023; David Pierson, “China’s Role in Iran-Saudi Arabia Deal Shows Xi’s Global
Goals, New York Times, March 11, 2023.
    2. Xinhua, “China Willing to Be Stabilizing Force in Dealing with Hotspot Issues:
FM,” February 18, 2024; Fan Hongda, “Observation on China’s Mediation of Sau-
di-Iranian Relations from the Perspective of the Global Security Initiative” (全球安
全倡议视域下的中国调解沙特伊朗关系观察), Northwest University’s Center for Iranian
Studies, August 21, 2023. Translation; China National Radio, “China Mediates the
Restoration of Diplomatic Relations between Saudi Arabia and Iran, Jin Yinan: Suc-
cessful Practice of Implementing the Global Security Initiative” (中国斡旋沙伊复交，
金一南：践行全球安全倡议的成功实践), March 21, 2023. Translation; Global Times,
“ ‘Showing China’s Image as a Responsible Major Country!’ The World ‘Likes’ China’s
Mediation on the Resumption of Diplomatic Relations between Saudi Arabia and
Iran” (“彰显中国负责任大国形象”！世界为中国斡旋沙伊复交“点赞”), March 13, 2023.
Translation.
    3. Amar Jallo, “China and the Arab World: From the Silent Partner to Center
Stage,” Wilson Center, August 17, 2023; Maha Yahya, “How Has China’s Role in the
Middle East Evolved?” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, September 26,
2019.
    4. Maha Yahya, “How Has China’s Role in the Middle East Evolved?” Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace, September 26, 2019; United Nations, Statistics
Division, “UN Comtrade Database.”
    5. Dale Aluf, “China’s Influence in the Middle East and Its Limitations,” Diplomat,
February 26, 2024.
    6. Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3.
    7. Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 2.
    8. Xiang Haoyu, “What ‘Partnerships’ Does China Have?” (中国的“伙伴”关系有哪
些?), Study Times, October 20, 2023. CSIS Interpret Translation.
    9. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Xi Jinping Holds Talks with President of
Egypt Abdel Fattah El-Sisi, May 29, 2024; Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before
the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China and
the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 2; Xinhua, “Xi, Assad Jointly Announce China-Syria
Strategic Partnership,” September 22, 2023; Xinhua, “Joint Statement between the
People’s Republic of China and the Syrian Arab Republic on Establishing a Strategic
Partnership” (中华人民共和国和阿 拉伯叙利亚共和国关于建立战略伙伴关 系的联合声明(
全文)), September 22, 2023. Translation; Mordechai Chaziza, “China’s Strategic Part-
nerships Are Remaking the Middle East,” National Review, June 30, 2023; Xinhua,
“Joint Statement between the People’s Republic of China and the State of Palestine
on Establishing a Strategic Partnership,” (中华人民共和国和巴勒斯坦国关于建立战略
伙伴关系的联合声明 (全文)), June 14, 2023. Translation; Mordechai Chaziza, “Chi-
na-Bahrain Relations in the Age of the Belt and Road Initiative,” Institute for Nation-
al Security Studies, October 2020; Jonathan Fulton, “Friends with Benefits: China’s
Partnership Diplomacy in the Gulf,” Project on Middle East Political Science, March
2019; Xinhua, “China, UAE Agree to Lift Ties to Comprehensive Strategic Partner-
ship,” June 21, 2018. “China and Israel Establish ‘Innovative Comprehensive Partner-
ship’ ” (中国以色列建立“创新全面 伙伴关系”), March 21, 2017. Translation; South China
Morning Post, “Quick Guide to China’s Diplomatic Levels,” January 20, 2016; China’s
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Joint Statement between the People’s Republic of China
and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan on Establishing a Strategic Partnership, Sep-
tember 9, 2015; China’s Embassy in the State of Qatar, Joint Statement between the
People’s Republic of China and the State of Qatar on Establishing a Strategic Part
(中华人民共和国和卡塔尔国关于建立战略伙伴关系的联合 声明 (全文)), November 3,
2014. Translation; Xinhua, “The People’s Republic of China and the Republic of Tür-
kiye Joint Statement on Establishing and Developing a Strategic Partnership” (中国
和土耳其发表建立 发展战略合作关系联合声明), October 9, 2010. Translation.
    10. Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3.
    11. Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3.
    12. Xinhua, “China, Bahrain Establish Comprehensive Strategic Partnership,”
State Council of the People’s Republic of China, May 31, 2024; China’s Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Xi Jinping Holds Talks with President of Egypt Abdel Fattah El-Sisi,
                                        382
May 29, 2024; Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19,
2024, 2; Xinhua, “Xi, Assad Jointly Announce China-Syria Strategic Partnership,”
September 22, 2023. Xinhua, “Joint Statement between the People’s Republic of Chi-
na and the Syrian Arab Republic on Establishing a Strategic Partnership” (中华人
民共和国和阿拉伯叙利亚共和国关于建立 战略伙伴关系的联合声明(全文)), September 22,
2023. Translation; Mordechai Chaziza, “China’s Strategic Partnerships Are Remaking
the Middle East,” National Review, June 30, 2023; Xinhua, “Joint Statement between
the People’s Republic of China and the State of Palestine on Establishing a Stra-
tegic Partnership,” (中华人民共和国和巴勒斯坦国关于建立战略伙伴关系的联 合声明 (全
文)), June 14, 2023. Translation; Jonathan Fulton, “Friends with Benefits: China’s
Partnership Diplomacy in the Gulf,” Project on Middle East Political Science, March
2019; Xinhua, “China, UAE Agree to Lift Ties to Comprehensive Strategic Partner-
ship,” June 21, 2018; Xinhua, “China and Israel Establish ‘Innovative Comprehen-
sive Partnership’ ” (中国以色列建立“创新全面伙伴关系”), March 21, 2017. Translation;
South China Morning Post, “Quick Guide to China’s Diplomatic Levels,” January 20,
2016; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Joint Statement between the People’s Re-
public of China and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan on Establishing a Strategic
Partnership, September 9, 2015; China’s Embassy in the State of Qatar, Joint State-
ment between the People’s Republic of China and the State of Qatar on Establishing
a Strategic Partnership (中华人民共和国和卡塔尔国关于建 立战略伙伴关系的联合声明
(全文)), November 3, 2014. Translation; Xinhua, “The People’s Republic of China and
the Republic of Türkiye Joint Statement on Establishing and Developing a Strate-
gic Partnership” (中国和土耳其发表建立 发展战略合作关系联合声明), October 9, 2010.
Translation.
   13. Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3.
   14. Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3.
   15. Nectar Gan and Simone McCarthy, “China’s Special Envoy Is on a Middle East
Mission. Peace Is Just Part of the Picture,” CNN, October 23, 2023.
   16. Nectar Gan and Simone McCarthy, “China’s Special Envoy Is on a Middle East
Mission. Peace Is Just Part of the Picture,” CNN, October 23, 2023.
   17. Nectar Gan and Simone McCarthy, “China’s Special Envoy Is on a Middle East
Mission. Peace Is Just Part of the Picture,” CNN, October 23, 2023.
   18. Dawn C. Murphy, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Se-
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024,
1; Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 1.
   19. Dawn C. Murphy, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 1–2.
   20. Aleksandra Gadzala Tirziu, “China’s Strategic Evolution in the Middle East:
From Oil to Security,” Geopolitical Intelligence Services, July 4, 2024; Jon B. Alter-
man, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Com-
mission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 2–3; U.S.-China Eco-
nomic and Security Review Commission, 2020 Annual Report to Congress, December
2020, 84–85.
   21. Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 1–2.
   22. Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 6–7.
   23. Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 6–7.
   24. Dawn C. Murphy, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Se-
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024,
7; Kawashima Shin, “How China Defines the ‘Global South,’ ” Diplomat, January 11,
2024.
   25. Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 1.
   26. Yun Sun, “China Wants to Weaken, Not Replace, the U.S. in the Middle East,”
Foreign Policy, February 29, 2024.
   27. Jon B. Alterman, oral testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 105.
   28. Jon B. Alterman, oral testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 105.
   29. Jon B. Alterman, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Se-
curity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024,
                                         383
2; Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 1.
   30. Jon Alterman, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 1; Dawn
C. Murphy, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 2; Wang Yu, “The
Israeli-Palestinian Conflict: Causes, Impacts and Solutions” (巴以冲突：根源、影响与
出路), International Cooperation Center, February 23, 2024. Translation; Liu Chang,
“Ten Years Later, We Look Back at the Arab Spring” (十年后, 再看 “阿拉伯之春”) Chi-
na Institute of International Studies, April 9, 2021. Translation; Guangming Daily,
“The Decade after the Arab Spring” (“阿拉伯之春” 后的十年寒冬), December 18, 2020.
Translation; Li Ruohan and Zhang Cheng, “Terrorist Threats and Security Responses
under the Perspective of the ‘Belt and Road Initiative’ ” (“一带一路” 倡议视野下的恐怖
主义威胁与安全应对), Journal of the Ocean University of China (2019). Translation;
Mao Jikang, “The Evolution of the Geopolitical Structure in the Middle East and
Its Impact on China’s Energy Security” (中东地缘政治格局演变及对我国能源安全影响),
Peace and Development 4 (2019): 118. Translation; Yu Qian, “Analysis of Political
Risks in Countries or Regions along the ‘Belt and Road’ ” (“一带一路” 沿线国家或地区
政治风险分), Shanghai Brilliance Credit Rating and Investors Service Co. Ltd., May
22, 2018, 8–9. Translation; China Youth Daily, “The Fifth Anniversary of the Arab
Spring: The Chaos in the Middle East and the Pain of the World” (“阿拉伯之春” 五周
年记:中东大乱 世界之痛), January 14, 2016. Translation.
   31. Cheng Shuaipeng, “International Observation: U.S. Middle East Policy Exac-
erbates Regional Crisis by Pouring Fuel on Fire” (国际观察｜边浇油边灭火 美中东
政策加剧地区危局), Xinhua, February 4, 2024. Translation; China Daily, “Gaza Spill-
over-Sparks Risk Igniting Wider War,” January 15, 2024; Global Times, “UNSC Has
Not Authorized Force against Yemen; China Urges All Parties Concerned to Abide
by International Law: China’s UN Envoy,” January 13, 2024; Yang Ran, “US Actions
Blamed for Red Sea Crisis,” China Daily, December 26, 2023; China’s Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Qin Gang: The United States Should Draw Lessons from Its Failure
in Afghanistan, April 13, 2023.
   32. Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 2–3.
   33. Dawn C. Murphy, “The Deep Foundations of China’s Mediator Role in the Mid-
dle East,” Australian Institute of International Affairs, April 14, 2023.
   34. Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 4.
   35. Michal Shmulovich, “China Unveils Peace Plan Based on 1967 Lines,” Times
of Israel, May 7, 2013; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokes-
person Hua Chunying’s Regular Press Conference on May 6, 2013, May 7, 2013; Cary
Huang, “Xi Proposes Four-Point Plan to Resolve Palestinian Issue,” South China
Morning Post, May 6, 2013.
   36. China’s Consulate-General in Toronto, Chinese President Makes Four-Point Pro-
posal for Settlement of Palestinian Question, May 6, 2013.
   37. Karl Vick, “China Can Posture, but It Can’t Bring Peace to the Middle East,”
Time, May 7, 2013.
   38. Charlotte Gao, “China Vows to Play an Active Role in Settling the Palestine-Is-
rael Issue,” Diplomat, December 28, 2017; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Wang
Yi Meets with Representatives of Palestine and Israel for Palestinian-Israeli Peace
Symposium, December 22, 2017; Associated Press and Times of Israel, “China Pushes
Four-Point Israeli-Palestinian Peace Plan,” August 1, 2017.
   39. Galia Levi, “China and the Middle East: The Israeli-Palestinian Conflict on the
Agenda,” Institute for National Strategic Studies, August 18, 2021; Helena Legarda,
“China Wades into the Israel-Palestine Conflict Once More,” Mercator Institute for
China Studies, May 28, 2021; Xinhua, “China Puts Forward Four-Point Proposal Re-
garding Palestine-Israel Conflict,” May 17, 2021.
   40. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Qin Gang Has a Phone Call with Israeli
Minister of Foreign Affairs Eli Cohen, April 17, 2023; China’s Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, Qin Gang Has a Phone Call with Palestinian Minister of Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates Riyadh al-Maliki, April 17, 2023; Peter Baker, “Chinese-Brokered Deal
Upends Mideast Diplomacy and Challenges U.S.,” New York Times, March 11, 2023.
   41. Joe Cash, “Xi: China Willing to Help Foster Palestinian Peacemaking with Isra-
el,” Reuters, June 14, 2023; Associated Press, “China Inks ‘Strategic Partnership’ with
Palestinian Authority as It Expands Middle East Presence,” June 14, 2023.
   42. Associated Press, “Netanyahu Says China Has Invited Him for a State Visit,”
June 27, 2023; Times of Israel, “ ‘Strategic Mistake’: Netanyahu Panned for Planning
China Visit as Signal to Biden,” June 27, 2023.
                                         384
   43. Amanda Chen, “Israeli Media Reaction to China’s Stance on the Israel-Hamas
War,” China-Global South Project, November 13, 2023; Lazar Berman, “Netanyahu
Confirms to US Lawmakers that He is Heading to China,” Times of Israel, June 27,
2023; Associated Press, “Netanyahu Says China Has Invited Him for a State Visit,”
June 27, 2023; Shalom Yerushalmi, “Netanyahu Set to Visit China Next Month, in
Trip Seen Likely to Annoy Biden,” Times of Israel, June 26, 2023; Xinhua, “Chinese,
Palestinian Presidents Hold Talks,” National Committee of the Chinese People’s Po-
litical Consultative Conference, June 15, 2023; Associated Press, “China Inks ‘Stra-
tegic Partnership’ with Palestinian Authority as It Expands Middle East Presence,”
June 14, 2023.
   44. Derek Grossman, “China Is Burning All Its Bridges with Israel,” RAND Cor-
poration, May 15, 2024; Christina Lu, “How China Is Leveraging the Israel-Hamas
War,” Foreign Policy, January 31, 2024; Simone Lipkind, “Fickle Friends: Sino-Israeli
Ties Buckle Amid War with Hamas,” Council on Foreign Relations, January 25, 2024;
Mark Leonard, “China’s Game in Gaza: How Beijing Is Exploiting Israel’s War to Win
Over the Global South,” Foreign Affairs, January 8, 2024.
   45. Derek Grossman, “China Is Burning All Its Bridges with Israel,” RAND Cor-
poration, May 15, 2024; Christina Lu, “How China Is Leveraging the Israel-Hamas
War,” Foreign Policy, January 31, 2024; Simone Lipkind, “Fickle Friends: Sino-Israeli
Ties Buckle Amid War with Hamas,” Council on Foreign Relations, January 25, 2024;
Mark Leonard, “China’s Game in Gaza: How Beijing Is Exploiting Israel’s War to Win
Over the Global South,” Foreign Affairs, January 8, 2024; Kawashima Shin, “How
China Defines the ‘Global South,’ ” Diplomat, January 11, 2024.
   46. Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 5.
   47. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson’s Remarks
on the Escalation of Tensions between Palestine and Israel, October 8, 2023; Evelyn
Cheng, “China Responds to Israel-Hamas Conflict with a Call to ‘End the Hostilities,’
CNBC, October 8, 2023.
   48. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Mao Ning’s
Regular Press Conference on October 9, 2023, October 9, 2023; Andrew Zhang, “During
Rare China Trip, Schumer Criticizes Country’s Initial Reaction to Hamas Attack on
Israel,” Politico, October 9, 2023; Ken Mortisugu, “US Senate Majority Leader Schum-
er Meets Xi and Welcomes Stronger Chinese Statement on Hamas Attack,” Associat-
ed Press, October 9, 2023.
   49. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Mao Ning’s
Regular Press Conference on October 9, 2023, October 9, 2023; Andrew Zhang, “During
Rare China Trip, Schumer Criticizes Country’s Initial Reaction to Hamas Attack on
Israel,” Politico, October 9, 2023; Ken Mortisugu, “US Senate Majority Leader Schum-
er Meets Xi and Welcomes Stronger Chinese Statement on Hamas Attack,” Associat-
ed Press, October 9, 2023.
   50. Josephine Ma, “Gaza Crisis: China ‘Always’ behind Arab, Islamic World on Le-
gitimate Aims, Foreign Minister Wang Yi to Malaysia’s Kadir,” South China Morning
Post, October 21, 2023; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Wang Yi Has a Phone Call
with Foreign Minister of Iran Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, October 15, 2023.
   51. Grant Rumley and Rebecca Redlich, “Tracking Chinese Statements on the
Hamas-Israel Conflict,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, May 10, 2024;
AFP, “China: Israel’s Actions in Gaza Have Gone ‘Beyond the Scope of Self-Defense,’ ”
Times of Israel, October 15, 2023.
   52. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Wang Yi Has a Phone Call with Israeli
Foreign Minister Eli Cohen, October 24, 2024; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Wang Yi Has a Phone Call with Palestinian Foreign Minister Riyad Al-Maliki, Octo-
ber 24, 2023.
   53. Dang Yuan, “Decoding China: Beijing, BRICS Seek Middle East Influence,”
Deutsche Welle, November 24, 2023; China’s Embassy in the United States of Ameri-
ca, “Xi Jinping Attends the Extraordinary Joint Meeting of BRICS Leaders and Lead-
ers of Invited BRICS Members on the Situation in the Middle East with Particular
Reference to Gaza,” November 22, 2023.
   54. Zhao Ziwen, “ ‘Disgrace for Civilisation’: China Repeats Call for Gaza Ceasefire,
Peace Talks on Middle East and Ukraine,” South China Morning Post, March 7, 2024.
   55. Dawn C. Murphy, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 7.
   56. Adam Rasgon and Vivian Wang, “China Will Host Senior Officials of Hamas
and Fatah, Longtime Adversaries,” New York Times, July 15, 2024; Yun Sun, “With
Second Meeting in June, China Finds Opportunity in Hamas-Fatah Talks,” Al-Mon-
itor, May 14, 2024.
                                        385
   57. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ambassador Wang Kejian Mmeets with
Hamas Political Bureau Chairman Haniyeh (外交部大使王克俭会见哈马斯政治局主席
哈尼亚), March 19, 2024. Translation; Simone McCarthy and Wayne Chang, “Chinese
Envoy Meets Hamas Chief Haniyeh After First Visit to Israel Since Gaza War Be-
gan,” CNN, March 19, 2024; Middle East Monitor, “China: We Are Keen on Maintain-
ing Relations with Hamas,” March 18, 2024; Zhao Ziwen, “China Sends First Envoy
to Palestine and Israel in Direct Push for Gaza War Ceasefire,” South China Morning
Post, March 15, 2024.
   58. Damien Cave and Adam Rasgon, “Hamas and Fatah Officials, Longtime Rivals,
Met in China,” New York Times, April 30, 2024.
   59. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Special Envoy Zhai Jun of the Chinese
Government on the Middle East Issue Attends Israel’s National Day Concert, June
21, 2024; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Special Envoy Zhai Jun of the Chinese
Government on the Middle East Issue Meets with Israeli Ambassador to China Irit
Ben-Abba Vitale, April 15, 2024.
   60. Xinhua, “Palestinian Factions Sign Beijing Declaration on Ending Division,
Strengthening Palestinian National Unity,” State Council of the People’s Republic of
China, July 24, 2024; Kali Robinson, “Who Governs the Palestinians?” Council on For-
eign Relations, May 28, 2024; Wilson Center, “Doctrine of Hamas,” October 20, 2023.
   61. Robert Barron, Andrew Scobell, and Adam Gallagher, “Palestinian Factions
Pledge Unity: Another Diplomatic Win for China?” United States Institute of Peace,
July 25, 2024; Adam Rasgon and Alexandra Stevenson, “Multiple Past Attempts to
Broker Unity Have Failed,” New York Times, July 23, 2024; Adam Rasgon and Vivian
Wang, “China Will Host Senior Officials of Hamas and Fatah, Longtime Adversaries,”
New York Times, July 15, 2024.
   62. China Arab State Cooperation Forum, “China and Arab Countries Are Fel-
low Travelers in Implementing the Global Civilization Initiative” (中国和阿拉伯国
家是践行全球文明倡议的同路人), April 1, 2024. Translation; China Arab State Co-
operation Forum, “In 2023, the Concept of Building a Community with a Shared
Future for Mankind Will Take Root in the Middle East” (2023年, 构建人类命运共
同体理念在中东落地生根), January 3, 2024. Translation; Wang Di, “Carry Forward
the Spirit of China-Arab Friendship, Implement the Outcomes of the China-Arab
States Summit, and Make All-Out Efforts to Build a China-Arab Community with
a Shared Future in the New Era,” Chinese People’s Institute of Foreign Affairs;
Saudi Press Agency, “Riyadh Declaration - The First Arab-China Summit,” De-
cember 9, 2022.
   63. Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 6.
   64. M. Taylor Fravel, “China’s Global Security Initiative at Two: A Journey, Not a
Destination,” China Leadership Monitor, May 30, 2024, 3; China’s Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, The Global Security Initiative Concept Paper, February 21, 2023.
   65. M. Taylor Fravel, “China’s Global Security Initiative at Two: A Journey, Not a
Destination,” China Leadership Monitor. May 30, 2024.
   66. Sheena Chestnut Greitens, “Xi’s Security Obsession: Why China Is Digging In
at Home and Asserting Itself Abroad,” Foreign Affairs, July 28, 2023.
   67. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, The Global Security Initiative Concept Pa-
per, February 21, 2023.
   68. M. Taylor Fravel, “China’s Global Security Initiative at Two: A Journey, Not a
Destination,” China Leadership Monitor, May 30, 2024; Jesse Marks, “China’s Stra-
tegic Facilitation in the Persian Gulf Security Crisis,” Stimson Center, May 10, 2024;
China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Wang Yi Attends the Second Middle East Security
Forum, September 21, 2022.
   69. China Institute of International Studies, “Wang Yi Attends the Second Middle
East Security Forum,” September 29, 2022.
   70. M. Taylor Fravel, “China’s Global Security Initiative at Two: A Journey, Not a
Destination,” China Leadership Monitor, May 30, 2024.
   71. China Institute of International Studies, “Report on the Implementation of the
Global Security Initiative,” July 2024, 11; Xinhua, “China Willing to Be Stabilizing
Force in Dealing with Hotspot Issues: FM,” February 18, 2024; Fan Hongda, “Obser-
vation on China’s Mediation of Saudi-Iranian Relations from the Perspective of the
Global Security Initiative” (全球安全倡议视域下的中国调解沙特伊朗关系观察), North-
west University’s Center for Iranian Studies, August 21, 2023. Translation; China
National Radio, “China Mediates the Restoration of Diplomatic Relations between
Saudi Arabia and Iran, Jin Yinan: Successful Practice of Implementing the Global
Security Initiative” (中国斡旋沙伊复交，金一南：践行全球安全倡议的成功实践), March
21, 2023. Translation; Global Times, “ ‘Showing China’s Image as a Responsible Ma-
jor Country!’ The World ‘Likes’ China’s Mediation on the Resumption of Diplomatic
                                         386
Relations between Saudi Arabia and Iran” (“彰显中国负责任大国形象”! 世界为中国斡旋
沙伊复交“点赞”), March 13, 2023. Translation.
   72. M. Taylor Fravel, “China’s Global Security Initiative at Two: A Journey, Not a
Destination,” China Leadership Monitor, May 30, 2024; Yao Yao, “The Global Devel-
opment Initiative Provides a Blueprint for Responding to World Changes,” Red Flag
Manuscript, February 25, 2022. CSIS Interpret Translation.
   73. Manoj Kewalramani, “China as a Rising Norm Entrepreneur: Examining the
GDI, GSI and GCI,” Trends in Southeast Asia 2:2024 (January 2024); Chen Chao and
Wang Yiwei, “Synergies between the Global Development Initiative and the Belt and
Road Initiative” (全球发展倡议与 “一带一路” 协同增效), Beijing Daily, May 27, 2022.
CSIS Interpret Translation.
   74. Chen Yunnan, “China’s Global Development Initiative Is Not the BRI Reborn,”
Nikkei Asia, March 8, 2023.
   75. Dale Aluf, “China’s Influence in the Middle East and Its Limitations,” Dip-
lomat, February 26, 2024; Yao Yao, “The Global Development Initiative Provides a
Blueprint for Responding to World Changes” (“全球发展 倡议”为因应世界变局擘画蓝
图), Red Flag Manuscript, February 25, 2022. CSIS Interpret Translation; China’s
Mission to the UN, Friends of Global Development Initiative Officially Launched at
the UN New York Headquarters, January 20, 2022.
   76. Center for International Knowledge on Development, “Progress Report on the
Global Development Initiative 2023,” June 20, 2023, 29; China’s Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, Concept Note on the Global Clean Energy Cooperation Partnership, Septem-
ber 28, 2022.
   77. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Let Us Take Real Action to Build a Chi-
na-Arab Community with a Shared Future, May 30, 2024.
   78. Michael Schuman, Jonathan Fulton, and Tuvia Gering, “How Beijing’s Newest
Global Initiatives Seek to Remake the World Order,” Atlantic Council, June 21, 2023;
R. Evan Ellis, “The Trouble with China’s Global Civilization Initiative,” Diplomat,
June 1, 2023; Xinhua, “Full Text of Xi Jinping’s Keynote Address at the CPC in Dia-
logue with World Political Parties High-Level Meeting,” March 16, 2023.
   79. R. Evan Ellis, “The Trouble with China’s Global Civilization Initiative,” Diplo-
mat, June 1, 2023; Qin Gang, “Forging Ahead on the New Journey toward a Commu-
nity with a Shared Future for Mankind,” China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, March
27, 2023.
   80. China’s State Council Information Office, Full Text of Xi Jinping’s Keynote Ad-
dress at the CPC in Dialogue with World Political Parties High-Level Meeting, March
16, 2023.
   81. R. Evan Ellis, “The Trouble with China’s Global Civilization Initiative,” Diplo-
mat, June 1, 2023.
   82. International Department of the Chinese Communist Party’s Central Commit-
tee, Yinchuan Declaration on the Implementation of the Global Civilization Initiative
at the Fourth China-Arab Political Parties Dialogue, July 14, 2023. Translation.
   83. International Department of the Chinese Communist Party’s Central Commit-
tee, Yinchuan Declaration on the Implementation of the Global Civilization Initiative
at the Fourth China-Arab Political Parties Dialogue, July 14, 2023. Translation.
   84. Xinhua, “Xi Urges Greater Efforts to Build China-Arab Community with
Shared Future,” May 30, 2024.
   85. Peter Irwin, “Islam Dispossessed: China’s Persecution of Uyghur Imams and
Religious Figures,” Uyghur Human Rights Project, May 13, 2021; Nathan Ruser et
al., “Cultural Erasure: Tracing the Destruction of Uyghur and Islamic Spaces in Xin-
jiang,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute, September 24, 2020.
   86. Bradley Jardine and Lucille Greer, “Beyond Silence: Collaboration between
Arab States and China in the Transnational Repression of Uyghurs,” Oxus Society
for Central Asian Affairs and Uyghur Human Rights Project, April 22, 2022; Bradley
Jardine, Edward Lemon, and Natalie Hall, “No Space Left to Run: China’s Transna-
tional Repression of Uyghurs,” Oxus Society for Central Asian Affairs and UHRP,
June 24, 2021.
   87. Maya Wang, “ ‘Eradicating Ideological Viruses’ China’s Campaign of Repression
against Xinjiang’s Muslims,” Human Rights Watch, September 10, 2018.
   88. Jewlan and Jilil Kashgary, “Arab Nations Praise China’s Uyghur Policies: So-
ciety Is ‘Harmonious,’ Religion Free,” Radio Free Asia, June 23, 2023; Muhammad
Zulfikar Rakhmat and M. Habib Pashya, “China Is Courting Middle Eastern Nations
on Xinjiang,” Diplomat, May 5, 2021; Roie Yellinek and Elizabeth Chen, “The “22 vs.
50” Diplomatic Split Between the West and China Over Xinjiang and Human Rights,”
Jamestown Foundation, December 31, 2019; Nick Cumming-Bruce, “China’s Retort
over Its Mass Detentions: Praise from Russia and Saudi Arabia,” New York Times,
July 12, 2019.
                                        387
   89. Frederik Kelter, “China Targets Friendly Media, Diplomats to ‘Tell Story of
Xinjiang,’ ” Al-Jazeera, January 2, 2024; Middle East Monitor, “Diplomats from 30
Muslim Countries Visited China’s Xinjiang Region,” August 10, 2022.
   90. Bradley Jardine and Lucille Greer, “Beyond Silence: Collaboration between
Arab States and China in the Transnational Repression of Uyghurs,” Oxus Society
for Central Asian Affairs and Uyghur Human Rights Project, April 22, 2022; Bradley
Jardine, Edward Lemon, and Natalie Hall, “No Space Left to Run: China’s Transna-
tional Repression of Uyghurs,” Oxus Society for Central Asian Affairs and Uyghur
Human Rights Project, June 24, 2021.
   91. Nilgün Eliküçük Yıldırım, “The Uyghur Issue in Turkey-China Relations,”
Heinrich-Böll-Stiftung, April 5, 2024; Ben Carrdus, “ ‘I Escaped, But Not to Freedom:’
Failure to Protect Uyghur Refugees,” Uyghur Human Rights Project, June 20, 2023;
Mustafa Akyol, “How China Coopted Turkey to Forsake the Uyghurs,” Hudson Insti-
tute, January 26, 2022.
   92. Aynur Kerimu, “Türkiye Strengthens Pivot Toward China,” Jamestown Foun-
dation, June 24, 2024.
   93. Dawn Murphy, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 1–2.
   94. Jonathan Fulton, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 7.
   95. Dawn Murphy, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 2.
   96. BRICS Policy Center, “The China-Arab States Cooperation Forum (CASCF),”
May 2016.
   97. Dawn Murphy, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3.
   98. Dawn Murphy, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3.
   99. Nick Carraway, “China and 22 Arab Countries Reach Consensus on Gaza
Ceasefire and Further Cooperation,” Diplomat, July 10, 2024; Dawn Murphy, written
testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing
on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3.
   100. Dawn Murphy, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3.
   101. Dawn Murphy, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3.
   102. Dawn Murphy, written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3.
   103. Nick Carraway, “China and 22 Arab Countries Reach Consensus on Gaza
Ceasefire and Further Cooperation,” Diplomat, July 10, 2024; Reuters, “Xi says China
Wants to Work with Arab States to Resolve Hot Spot Issues,” May 30, 2024.
   104. Nick Carraway, “China and 22 Arab Countries Reach Consensus on Gaza
Ceasefire and Further Cooperation,” Diplomat, July 10, 2024; Dewey Sim, “Isra-
el-Gaza War: China and Arab States Condemn ‘Continued Aggression’ in Gaza, Urge
Support for Palestinian Statehood,” South China Morning Post, May 31, 2024; Global
Times, “Joint Statement Adopted by China, Arab States Calls for Immediate Cease-
Fire,” May 31, 2024.
   105. Jane Perlez, “President Xi Jinping of China Is All Business in Middle East
Visit,” New York Times, January 1, 2016; Stanley Carvalho, “Xi’s Visit to UAE High-
lights China’s Rising Interest in Middle East,” Reuters, July 20, 2018; Aya Batrawy,
“China’s Xi Jinping Visits Saudi Arabia to Assert Power and Rival U.S. Influence,”
NPR, December 8, 2022.
   106. Kate Bartlett, “Why Chinese Foreign Minister’s Visit Focuses on North and
West Africa,” Voice of America, January 16, 2024; Jonathan Fulton, “Mr. Wang Gto
the Middle East,” Atlantic Council, April 1, 2021.
   107. Jon Alterman, written testimony before U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 4.
   108. Jon Alterman, written testimony before U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 4.
   109. Jon Alterman, written testimony before U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 5.
   110. Jon Alterman, written testimony before U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 5.
   111. Xinhua, “Belt and Road Initiative to Boost Saudi Arabia’s Economic, Social
Development, Says Saudi Minister,” December 12, 2022.
   112. Shannon Tiezzi, “China’s Xi Heads to Saudi Arabia to Boost Beijing’s Influ-
ence in the Middle East,” Diplomat, December 7, 2022.
                                        388
   113. Kawala Xie and Teddy Ng, “China and Saudi Arabia Pledge to Widen Ties to
‘All Fields’ and Work Together on Iran Nuclear Programme,” South China Morning
Post, December 9, 2022.
   114. Vivian Nereim, “China and Saudi Arabia Sign Strategic Partnership as Xi
Visits Kingdom,” New York Times, December 8, 2022.
   115. Jon Alterman, written testimony before U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 4.
   116. Jon Alterman, written testimony before U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 4.
   117. Jon Alterman, written testimony before U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 4–5.
   118. U.S. Department of State, Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) Fre-
quently Asked Questions; J. Peter Scoblic, “China Issues Missile Export Pledge; U.S.
Says It Will Waive Sanctions,” Arms Control Association, December 2000.
   119. Julia Masterson, “Saudi Arabia Said to Produce Ballistic Missiles,” Arms Con-
trol Association, January/February 2022.
   120. Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, “SIPRI Arms Transfers
Database,” March 11, 2024; Mohman Malla, “Is China Abandoning Its Iran-Saudi
Balancing Act?” East Asia Forum, November 25, 2022; Peter Wood and Alex Stone,
“China’s Ballistic Missile Industry,” China Aerospace Studies Institute, 2021, 14;
Bruce Riedel, “Saudi Arabia’s Relations with China: Functional, but Not Strategic,”
Brookings Institution, July 20, 2020.
   121. Jared Malsin, Summer Said, and Warren P. Strobel, “Saudis Begin Making
Ballistic Missiles with Chinese Help,” Wall Street Journal, December 23, 2021.
   122. Jared Malsin, Summer Said, and Warren P. Strobel, “Saudis Begin Making
Ballistic Missiles with Chinese Help,” Wall Street Journal, December 23, 2021.
   123. Julia Masterson, “Saudi Arabia Said to Produce Ballistic Missiles,” Arms Con-
trol Association, January/February 2022.
   124. Julia Masterson, “Saudi Arabia Said to Produce Ballistic Missiles,” Arms Con-
trol Association, January/February 2022.
   125. Zachary Cohen, “CNN Exclusive: US Intel and Satellite Images Show Saudi
Arabia Is Now Building Its Own Ballistic Missiles with Help of China,” CNN, De-
cember 23, 2021.
   126. Mohman Malla, “Is China Abandoning Its Iran-Saudi Balancing Act?” East
Asia Forum, November 25, 2022.
   127. Tong Fei, “The Belt and Road Initiative and the New Changes in China-UAE
Relations” (“一带一路” 倡议与中国—阿联酋关系的新变化), Middle East Studies 11:1
(2020): 152. Translation.
   128. Yuting Wang, “Opportunities and Challenges for the UAE’s Chinese Expa-
triate Community in a New Era,” Gulf Arab States Institute in Washington, May 5,
2022.
   129. Tong Fei, “The Belt and Road Initiative and the New Changes in China-UAE
Relations” (“一带一路” 倡议与中国—阿联酋关系的新变化), Middle East Studies 11:1
(2020): 152. Translation.
   130. Jon Alterman, written testimony before U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 6.
   131. Tong Fei, “The Belt and Road Initiative and the New Changes in China-UAE
Relations” (“一带一路” 倡议与中国—阿联酋关系的新变化), Middle East Studies 11:1
(2020): 163. Translation.
   132. Tong Fei, “The Belt and Road Initiative and the New Changes in China-UAE
Relations” (“一带一路” 倡议与中国—阿联酋关系的新变化), Middle East Studies 11:1
(2020): 163–164. Translation.
   133. Tong Fei, “The Belt and Road Initiative and the New Changes in China-UAE
Relations” (“一带一路” 倡议与中国—阿联酋关系的新变化), Middle East Studies 11:1
(2020): 164. Translation.
   134. Tong Fei, “The Belt and Road Initiative and the New Changes in China-UAE
Relations” (“一带一路” 倡议与中国—阿联酋关系的新变化), Middle East Studies 11:1
(2020): 164. Translation.
   135. Tong Fei, “The Belt and Road Initiative and the New Changes in China-UAE
Relations” (“一带一路” 倡议与中国—阿联酋关系的新变化), Middle East Studies 11:1
(2020): 164. Translation.
   136. Stella Chen, “Discourse Power,” China Media Project, May 30, 2022; Kenton
Thibaut, Simin Kargar, and Daniel Suárez Pérez, “China’s Discourse Power Opera-
tions in the Global South,” Atlantic Council, April 2022, 17–21; China Media Project,
“Telling China’s Story Well,” April 16, 2021.
   137. Sarah Cook, “Beijing’s Global Megaphone,” Freedom House, January 2020.
                                        389
   138. Xinhua, “Interview: Arab-Chinese Media Cooperation Essential amid Com-
mon Challenges, Says Egyptian Expert,” December 5, 2023; Sarah Cook, “Beijing’s
Global Megaphone,” Freedom House, January 2020.
   139. Merissa Khurma, “China Has a Growing Presence in Arab Hearts and Minds,”
Wilson Center, June 5, 2023; Shaina Oppenheimer, “What Do Chinese Media Outlets
Say about the Middle East? Depends Which Language You’re Reading,” Haaretz, Feb-
ruary 1, 2021.
   140. Bertie Lyhne-Gold and David Bandurski, “A Media Labyrinth in the Middle
East,” June 25, 2024.
   141. Lama Al-Hamawi, “Arab-Chinese Media Cooperation Forum Launches Joint
Broadcasting Initiative,” Arab News, December 8, 2022.
   142. Lama Al-Hamawi, “Arab-Chinese Media Cooperation Forum Launches Joint
Broadcasting Initiative,” Arab News, December 8, 2022.
   143. Tang Zhichao, “Middle Eastern Countries Move towards Strategic Autonomy”
(中东国家迈向战略自主), Xinhua, July 26, 2022. Translation.
   144. Tang Zhichao, “Strategic Competition between China and the United States
in the Middle East and China’s Response” (中美在中东的战略竞争与中国的应对) Inter-
national Cooperation Center, February 17, 2024. Translation.
   145. Gao Wencheng, “Xinhua Commentary: The United States ‘Lost Power’ in the
Middle East Because It Lost the People’s Hearts” (新华时评: 美国中东 “失势” 失在人
心), Xinhua, June 14, 2023. Translation.
   146. Jon Alterman, written testimony before U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 6.
   147. Jon Alterman, written testimony before U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 6–7;
United States Institute of Peace, “Iran & China: A Trade Lifeline,” Iran Primer, July
5, 2023.
   148. Jon Alterman, written testimony before U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 7.
   149. Jon Alterman, written testimony before U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 6.
   150. Al-Jazeera, “China Calls for Iran Sanctions to Be Lifted during Raisi’s Vis-
it,” February 16, 2023; Reuters, China Slams U.S. Sanctions on Iran as Cooperation
Agreement Launched,” January 15, 2022; Security Council Report, “UN Documents
for Iran: Security Council Resolutions.”
   151. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Iranian President Pezeshkian Meets with
Wang Yi (伊朗总统佩泽希齐扬会见王毅), September 25, 2024. Translation; China’s
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Wang Yi Meets with Secretary of Iran’s Supreme Na-
tional Security Council Ahmadiyan (王毅会见伊朗最高国家安全委员会秘书艾哈迈迪安),
July 25, 2023. Translation; Reuters, “China, Iran Call for Iran Sanctions to be Lift-
ed; Xi to Visit,” February 16, 2023; China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Xi Jinping
Holds Talks with Iranian President Raisi (习近平同伊朗总统莱希举行会谈), February
14, 2023. Translation.
   152. Dan Katz, “Despite Sanctions, China Is Still Doing (Some) Business with
Iran,” Atlantic Council, October 1, 2019; Associated Press, “Iran Says China’s State
Oil Company Has Pulled Out of $5 Billion Deal,” October 6, 2019.
   153. Li-Chen Sim and Nicole Grajewski, “What Does Russia Get Out of Iran’s
Membership in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization?” Atlantic Council, October
29, 2021.
   154. Kevin Lim, “China-Iran Diplomatic Relations in Broader Perspective,” in Chi-
na-Iran Relations: Strategic, Economic, and Diplomatic Aspects in Comparative Per-
spective, Institute for National Security Studies, June 7, 2021, 53.
   155. Nicole Grajewski, “Iranian Membership in the Shanghai Cooperation Orga-
nization: Motivations and Implications,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy,
September 15, 2021.
   156. Nicole Grajewski, “Iranian Membership in the Shanghai Cooperation Orga-
nization: Motivations and Implications,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy,
September 15, 2021.
   157. Jonathan Fulton, “Iran Joining the SCO Isn’t Surprising. But Beijing’s Pro-
motion of Illiberal Norms in Eurasia Should Get More Attention,” Atlantic Council,
July 13, 2023.
   158. Wang Yi, “Pooling Strengths and Working Together for a Brighter Future of
BRICS,” Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, June 10, 2024.
   159. Tehran Times, “Chinese Envoy Says Beijing Backs Iran’s Bid to Join BRICS,”
July 16, 2023.
   160. Shahir Shahidsaless, “The Implications of Iran’s Inclusion in BRICS,” Stimson
Center, August 31, 2023; China’s Embassy in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Bring Out
                                       390
the Best in BRICS Cooperation and Ensure a Promising Future for BRICS Countries,
August 26, 2023.
  161. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Treasury Targets Iranian Missile and UAV
Procurement Facilitators, July 30, 2024; U.S. Department of the Treasury, Treasury
Targets Iran’s International UAV Procurement Network, March 9, 2023.
  162. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, 15 CFR Part
744 [Docket No. 240820-0222] RIN 0694-AJ79, August 27, 2024; U.S. Department of
Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, 15 CFR Part 744 [Docket No. 240405-
0101] RIN 0694-AJ57, April 11, 2024; U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of In-
dustry and Security, 15 CFR Part 744 [Docket No. 230920-0227] RIN 0694-AJ30,
September 27, 2023.
  163. Heath Sloane, “Droning On: China Floods the Middle East with UAVs,” Dip-
lomat, September 2, 2022; Barbara Leaf, oral testimony for the Senate Foreign Re-
lations Committee, Hearing on China’s Role in the Middle East, August 4, 2022, 10.
  164. Kevin Pollpeter and Tsun-Kai Tsai, “To Be More Precise: BEIDOU, GPS, and
the Emerging Competition in Satellite-Based PNT,” China Aerospace Studies Insti-
tute, May 20, 2024, 55; Jemima Baar, “BeiDou and Strategic Advancements in PRC
Space Navigation,” Jamestown Foundation, March 1, 2024; Mehr News Agency, “Chi-
na to Give Iran Access to BeiDou,” January 28, 2021; Mehr News Agency, “Chinese
BeiDou BDS to Transfer Satellite Tech. to Iran,” October 18, 2015.
  165. Associated Press, “Hamas Fights with Patchwork of Weapons Built by Iran,
China, Russia and North Korea,” January 15, 2024; Joe Saballa, “ ‘Massive’ Cache of
Chinese-Made Weapons Found in Gaza: Report,” Defense Post, January 2, 2024.
  166. Associated Press, “Hamas Fights with Patchwork of Weapons Built by Iran,
China, Russia and North Korea,” January 15, 2024; Joe Saballa, “ ‘Massive’ Cache of
Chinese-Made Weapons Found in Gaza: Report,” Defense Post, January 2, 2024; Mi-
chael Biesecker, “Hamas Fights with a Patchwork of Weapons Built by Iran, China,
Russia, and North Korea,” AP News, January 15, 2024.
  167. Seong Hyeon Choi, “China Denies Providing Weapons to Hamas in Israel-Ga-
za War,” South China Morning Post, January 25, 2024; Rebecca Rommen, “Hamas
Using Top-Grade Chinese Weapons in Gaza, Including Assault Rifles and Grenade
Launchers, Says Israel,” Business Insider, January 6, 2024.
  168. Benoit Faucon et al., “The Russian Drone Plant That Could Shape the War in
Ukraine,” Wall Street Journal, May 28, 2024; Dan Sabbagh, “Deadly, Cheap and Wide-
spread: How Iran-Supplied Drones are Changing the Nature of Warfare,” Guardian,
February 2, 2024; United Nations Security Council, “Final Report of the Panel of
Experts on Yemen,” February 10, 2020.
  169. U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, “Iran: Enabling Houthi Attacks Across the
Middle East,” Feruary 6, 2024.
  170. Aadil Brar, “Houthi Rebel Missiles in the Red Sea Have a Link to China,”
Newsweek, December 20, 2023.
  171. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Treasury Targets Houthi Weapons Procure-
ment and Funding Networks, June 17, 2024; Farzin Nadimi, “The UN Exposes Houthi
Reliance on Iranian Weapons,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, February
13, 2020.
  172. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Treasury Targets Houthi Weapons Procure-
ment and Funding Networks, June 17, 2024.
  173. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Treasury Targets Houthi Weapons Procure-
ment and Funding Networks, June 17, 2024.
  174. Kimberly Donovan and Maia Nikoladze, “The Axis of Evasion: Behind China’s
Oil Trade with Iran and Russia,” Atlantic Council, March 28, 2024.
  175. Kimberly Donovan and Maia Nikoladze, “The Axis of Evasion: Behind China’s
Oil Trade with Iran and Russia,” Atlantic Council, March 28, 2024.
  176. United Against Nuclear Iran, “Iran Tanker Tracking.” Kimberly Donovan and
Maia Nikoladze, “The Axis of Evasion: Behind China’s Oil Trade with Iran and Rus-
sia,” Atlantic Council, March 28, 2024; Oceana Zhou and Daisy Xu, “China’s Small
Independent Refineries to Continue Favoring Iranian Crudes in 2024,” S&P Global,
January 19, 2024.
  177. Jimmy Troderman, “China Imported Record Amounts of Crude Oil in 2023,”
U.S. Energy Information Administration, April 16, 2024; United Against Nuclear Iran,
“Iran Tanker Tracking.”
  178. Erica Downs, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 2; Brett Sudetic
and Umud Shokri, “Iranian Sanctions Evasion and the Gulf ’s Complex Oil Trade,”
Middle East Institute, May 11, 2021.
  179. United Against Nuclear Iran, “Iran Tanker Tracking.”
                                        391
   180. Clayton Thomas, Liana W. Rosen, and Jennifer K. Elsea, “Iran’s Petroleum
Exports to China and U.S. Sanctions,” Congressional Research Service, May 8, 2024;
Muyu Xu, “Explainer: Iran’s Expanding Oil Trade with Top Buyer China,” Reuters,
November 10, 2023.
   181. Erica Downs, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 2.
   182. Muyu Xu, “Explainer: Iran’s Expanding Oil Trade with Top Buyer China,”
Reuters, November 10, 2023.
   183. Muyu Xu, “Explainer: Iran’s Expanding Oil Trade with Top Buyer China,”
Reuters, November 10, 2023.
   184. Clayton Thomas, Liana W. Rosen, and Jennifer K. Elsea, “Iran’s Petroleum
Exports to China and U.S. Sanctions,” Congressional Research Service, May 8, 2024;
22 U.S.C. § 8513a(d).
   185. Nurettin Akcay, “Beyond Oil: A New Phase in China-Middle East Engage-
ment,” Diplomat, January 25, 2023.
   186. Karen E. Young, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 12.
   187. State Council of the People’s Republic of China, China’s Arab Policy Paper,
January 2016.
   188. State Council of the People’s Republic of China, China’s Arab Policy Paper,
January 2016.
   189. Jonathan Fulton and Michael Schuman, “China’s Middle East Policy Shift
from ‘Hedging’ to ‘Wedging,’ ” Atlantic Council, September 5, 2024; Jonathan Fulton,
written testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission,
Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 1; John Calabrese, “China
Prioritizes Short-Term Energy Security: Implications for Sino-Middle East Relations,”
Middle East Institute, July 12, 2022; State Council of the People’s Republic of China,
China’s Arab Policy Paper, January 2016.
   190. Mohammed Soliman, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 2; Nuret-
tin Akcay, “Beyond Oil: A New Phase in China-Middle East Engagement,” Diplomat,
January 25, 2023.
   191. ChinaMed Project, “ChinaMed Data: Middle East”; CEIC database.
   192. ChinaMed Project, “ChinaMed Data: Middle East.”
   193. ChinaMed Project, “ChinaMed Data: Middle East.”
   194. ChinaMed Project, “ChinaMed Data: Middle East.”
   195. UN Comtrade database; Center for Strategic and Emerging Studies China
Power, “How Is China’s Energy Footprint Changing?” February 15, 2016. Updated
November 9, 2023.
   196. Matthew P. Funaiole et al., “Dire Straits: China’s Push to Secure Its Energy
Interests in the Middle East,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, Febru-
ary 3, 2023.
   197. Erica Downs, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 1; Philip
Andrews-Speed and Lixia Yao, “China’s Evolving Energy Relations with the Middle
East,” Energy Studies Institute, National University of Singapore, 2020, 3.
   198. Charles Chang et al., “Saudi-China Ties and Renminbi-Based Oil Trade,”
S&P Global, August 20, 2024; Sercan Caliskan, “China Expands Its Oil Ties in Iraq,”
Diplomat, June 4, 2024; Fanny Zhang, “Saudi Aramco Eyes Stake in Hengli Petro-
chemical; Prowls for More China Investments,” Independent Commodity Intelligence
Services, April 23, 2024; Erica Downs, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and
Security Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024,
1; Howard J. Shatz, “Middle East–China Trade Prospects Remain Robust Despite Red
Sea Crisis,” RAND Corporation, February 8, 2024.
   199. Karen E. Young, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 12.
   200. Center for Strategic and Emerging Studies China Power, “How Is China’s
Energy Footprint Changing?” February 15, 2016. Updated November 9, 2023.
   201. U.S. Department of Commerce, International Trade Administration, China -
Country Commercial Guide, April 7, 2023.
   202. Erica Downs, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3–4; Internation-
al Energy Agency, “China: Coal.”
   203. Edward Hunt, “How the US Could Cut Off Middle East Oil to China if It
Wanted,” Responsible Statecraft, June 7, 2023; Lucas Myers, “Internal Politics, In-
stability, and China’s Frustrated Efforts to Escape the ‘Malacca Dilemma,’ ” Wilson
Center, July 20, 2021.
                                       392
  204. International Energy Agency, “China: Oil.” https://www.iea.org/countries/
china/oil; U.S. Energy Information Administration, China, November 14, 2023.
  205. Jimmy Troderman, “China Imported Record Amounts of Crude Oil in 2023,”
U.S. Energy Information Administration, April 16, 2024.
  206. Erica Downs, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 1.
  207. Jimmy Troderman, “China Imported Record Amounts of Crude Oil in 2023,”
U.S. Energy Information Administration, April 16, 2024; Erica Downs, written testi-
mony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China
and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3.
  208. Erica Downs, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3.
  209. Jimmy Troderman, “China Imported Record Amounts of Crude Oil in 2023,”
U.S. Energy Information Administration, April 16, 2024.
  210. Jimmy Troderman, “China Imported Record Amounts of Crude Oil in 2023,”
U.S. Energy Information Administration, April 16, 2024; U.S. Energy Information Ad-
ministration, Malaysia: Petroleum and Other Liquids.
  211. Goldman Sachs, “How Saudi Arabia Is Investing to Transform Its Economy,”
October 13, 2023.
  212. Saudi Aramco, “Aramco JV HAPCO Breaks Ground on New Refinery and Pet-
rochemical Complex,” March 29, 2023.
  213. Salma El Wardany, “Aramco to Start Talks to Buy 10% in China Refinery
Operator,” Bloomberg, September 27, 2023.
  214. Ziwei Zhang, Shangyou Nie, and Erica Downs, “Inside China’s 2023 Natural
Gas Development Report,” Center on Global Energy Policy at Columbia University,
September 11, 2023.
  215. Ziwei Zhang, Shangyou Nie, and Erica Downs, “Inside China’s 2023 Natural
Gas Development Report,” Center on Global Energy Policy at Columbia University,
September 11, 2023.
  216. Ruth Liao, “US Becomes Top LNG Exporter after Overtaking Australia and
Qatar,” Bloomberg, January 2, 2024.
  217. Erica Downs, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 4.
  218. Erica Downs, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 4.
  219. Ziwei Zhang, Shangyou Nie, and Erica Downs, “Inside China’s 2023 Natural
Gas Development Report,” Center on Global Energy Policy at Columbia University,
September 11, 2023.
  220. Ziwei Zhang, Shangyou Nie, and Erica Downs, “Inside China’s 2023 Natural
Gas Development Report,” Center on Global Energy Policy at Columbia University,
September 11, 2023.
  221. Cindy Liang, “Chinese Yards Set to Scale Up LNG Newbuild Construction at
Record Pace,” S&P Global, September 12, 2023; Ziwei Zhang, Shangyou Nie, and Er-
ica Downs, “Inside China’s 2023 Natural Gas Development Report,” Center on Global
Energy Policy at Columbia University, September 11, 2023.
  222. Ziwei Zhang, Shangyou Nie, and Erica Downs, “Inside China’s 2023 Natural
Gas Development Report,” Center on Global Energy Policy at Columbia University,
September 11, 2023.
  223. International Trade Administration, Saudi Arabia Renewable Energy, Sep-
tember 13, 2021; International Trade Administration, United Arab Emirates - Re-
newable Energy.
  224. International Energy Agency, “Renewables 2023: Analysis and Forecast to
2028,” January 2024, 46–47.
  225. Yujie Xue, “China’s Energy Trade with Middle East Set to Surge since Beijing
Brokered Last Year’s Iran-Saudi Deal, UBS Says,” South China Morning Post, April
16, 2024.
  226. International Atomic Energy Agency, Preparing 60 Years in Advance: The
UAE’s First Nuclear Power Plant and Plans for Future Decommissioning, April 2023.
  227. Summer Said et al., “Saudi Arabia Eyes Chinese Bid for Nuclear Plant,” Wall
Street Journal, August 25, 2023; Reuters, “UAE Signs Nuclear Energy Cooperation
Agreements with China Bodies,” May 7, 2023; Amnah Ibraheem, “The Nuclear-En-
ergy Option in the Arab Gulf States,” International Institute for Strategic Studies,
November 9, 2022.
  228. Mordor Intelligence, “GCC Electric Vehicle Market Size,” 2024.
  229. Matt Smith, “Chinese Carmakers ‘Taking Gulf by Storm,’ ” Arabian Gulf Busi-
ness Insight, June 26, 2024.
                                        393
   230. Daniel Ren, “Chinese EV Makers Train Sights on Middle East, Brazil, Russia
after US, EU Raise Tariffs,” South China Morning Post, July 11, 2024.
   231. World Economic Forum, “As China-Gulf Relations Deepen, Here Are 3 Key
Sectors for Growth,” April 10, 2024.
   232. Daniel Ren, “Chinese EV Makers Train Sights on Middle East, Brazil, Russia
after US, EU Raise Tariffs,” South China Morning Post, July 11, 2024; Astute Ana-
lytica, “Israel Electric Vehicle Market—Industry Dynamics, Market Size, and Oppor-
tunity Forecast to 2032,” May 13, 2024.
   233. Sean O’Kane, “Lucid Motors Raises Another $1 Billion from Saudi Arabia
as It Searches for Luxury EV Buyers,” Tech Crunch, March 25, 2024; PR Newswire,
“Lucid Group Makes History in Saudi Arabia as It Opens Country’s First-Ever Car
Manufacturing Facility,” September 27, 2023.
   234. Adam Lucente, “How UAE Fits into China’s Electric Vehicle Push,” Al-Mon-
itor, February 26, 2024; Reuters, “Abu Dhabi to Build Electric Vehicle Facility in Its
KIZAD Industrial Zone,” September 6, 2022.
   235. Daniel Ren, “Chinese EV Maker Nio Deal to License Technology to Middle
East Start-Up Forseven, Unit of Abu Dhabi’s CYVN Holdings,” South China Morning
Post, February 26, 2024.
   236. Reuters, “China’s Nio to Get $2.2 Bln Investment from Abu Dhabi’s CYVN,”
December 18, 2023.
   237. Peter Hoskins, “China Tesla Rival BYD Signs $1bn Turkey Plant Deal,” BBC,
July 8 2024.
   238. International Energy Agency, “Renewables 2023: Analysis and Forecast to
2028,” January 2024, 46–47.
   239. Karen E. Young, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 19; Arabian
Business, “China’s Silk Road Fund to Invest in Dubai Solar Project,” July 22, 2018.
   240. ACWA Power, “Who We Are,” 2024; Robert Mogielnicki, “China Strengthens
Its Presence in Gulf Renewable Energy,” Arab Gulf States Institute in Washington,
June 10, 2020.
   241. ACWA Power, “ACWA Power Signs Cooperation Agreements with Chinese
Partners on the 10th Anniversary of Belt and Road Initiative,” October 18, 2023; Rob-
ert Mogielnicki, “China Strengthens Its Presence in Gulf Renewable Energy,” Arab
Gulf States Institute in Washington, June 10, 2020.
   242. James McBride et al., “China’s Massive Belt and Road Initiative,” Council on
Foreign Relations, February 2, 2023.
   243. Karen E. Young, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 12.
   244. Amr Salah Mohamed, “China’s Growing Maritime Presence in Egypt’s Ports
and the Suez Canal,” Middle East Institute, November 3, 2023; Lawson Brigham,
“The Suez Canal and Global Trade Routes,” U.S. Naval Institute, May 2021.
   245. Amr Salah Mohamed, “China’s Growing Maritime Presence in Egypt’s Ports
and the Suez Canal,” Middle East Institute, November 3, 2023; Jevans Nyabiage,
“How Egypt Is Drawing Chinese Investors with the Suez Canal Shortcut to Europe—
and Other Lures,” South China Morning Post, June 5 2023; AidData, “China Exim-
bank and CDB Provide Credit Facility for TEDA Economic and Trade Cooperation
Zone Construction Project (Linked to Project ID#440).”
   246. Xinhua, “Five Years On, Suez Flagship Project Tells Story of Dynamic Chi-
na-Egypt Cooperation,” January 24, 2021; AidData, “China Eximbank and CDB Pro-
vide Credit Facility for TEDA Economic and Trade Cooperation Zone Construction
Project (Linked to Project ID#440).”
   247. Jevans Nyabiage, “How Egypt Is Drawing Chinese Investors with the Suez
Canal Shortcut to Europe—and Other Lures,” South China Morning Post, June 5,
2023.
   248. Amr Salah Mohamed, “China’s Growing Maritime Presence in Egypt’s Ports
and the Suez Canal,” Middle East Institute, November 3, 2023.
   249. Amr Salah Mohamed, “China’s Growing Maritime Presence in Egypt’s Ports
and the Suez Canal,” Middle East Institute, November 3, 2023.
   250. Karen E. Young, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 4.
   251. Karen E. Young, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 4; Indus-
trial Info Resources, “Chinese Consortium to Develop Industrial Park in Oman, an
Industrial Info Market Brief.”
   252. Karen E. Young, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 4.
                                         394
   253. Gordon Lubold and Warren P. Strobel, “Secret Chinese Port Project in Persian
Gulf Rattles U.S. Relations with U.A.E.,” Wall Street Journal, November 19, 2021.
   254. Gordon Lubold and Warren P. Strobel, “Secret Chinese Port Project in Persian
Gulf Rattles U.S. Relations with U.A.E.,” Wall Street Journal, November 19, 2021.
   255. Karen E. Young, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 4.
   256. Will Green and Taylore Roth, “China-Iran Relations: A Limited but Enduring
Strategic Partnership,” U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, June
28, 2021, 3; Chris Gill, “Iran Dumps Dollar for Yuan,” Asia Financial, October 7, 2020.
   257. Huileng Tan, “China’s Yuan Is Emerging as a Strong Challenger to the Dol-
lar’s Dominance. Here Are 5 Countries That Recently Turned to the Yuan Instead of
the USD for Trade,” Business Insider, May 8, 2023.
   258. Fahad Abuljadayel and Yujing Liu, “China and Saudi Arabia Sign Currency
Swap Worth $7 Billion,” Bloomberg, November 21, 2023; Reuters, “Iraq to Allow Trade
with China in Yuan - State Media,” February 22, 2023; Mike Bird, “China Tries to Lift
Yuan’s Profile with Oil Futures,” Wall Street Journal, March 26, 2018.
   259. International Institute for Strategic Studies, “The State of De-Dollarisation in
the Gulf Region,” July 2023.
   260. Erica Downs, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 5.
   261. Mordechai Chaziza, “A Decade of China’s Belt and Road Initiative in the Mid-
dle East,” National Interest, June 4, 2023; International Institute for Strategic Stud-
ies, “China Connects Database.”
   262. John Lee, “Iraq’s Development Road May Link with China’s Belt and Road,”
Iraq Business News, June 12, 2024; Edward White and Andrew England, “China
Pours Money into Iraq as US Retreats from Middle East,” Financial Times, February
2, 2022.
   263. U.S. House of Representatives Foreign Affairs Committee, China Regional
Snapshot: Middle East and North Africa, October 25, 2022; Edward White and An-
drew England, “China Pours Money into Iraq as US Retreats from Middle East,”
Financial Times, February 2, 2022.
   264. Rosemary Griffin et al., “Iraq Looks to Chinese Investors to Meet Ambitious
Output Growth Plans,” S&P Global, February 15, 2024; BasNews, “Iraq’s Oil Exports
to China Jumped by Nearly 50% in 2022: Statement,” February 2, 2023.
   265. White House, FACT SHEET: Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Invest-
ment at the G7 Summit, May 20, 2023.
   266. Karen E. Young, “All You Need to Know about the India-Middle East-Europe
Economic Corridor,” Al Majalla, November 4, 2023.
   267. White House, Memorandum of Understanding on the Principles of an In-
dia-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor, September 9, 2023.
   268. White House, Memorandum of Understanding on the Principles of an In-
dia-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor, September 9, 2023.
   269. Mohammad Eslami and Maria Papageorgiou, “China’s Increasing Role in the
Middle East: Implications for Regional and International Dynamics,” Georgetown
Journal of International Affairs, June 2, 2023; John Calabrese, “China’s Digital In-
roads into the Middle East,” East Asia Forum, October 19, 2022.
   270. National Development and Reform Commission, Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
and Ministry of Commerce, Vision and Actions on Jointly Building the Silk Road
Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road (推动共建丝绸之路经济带和21
世纪海上丝绸之路的愿景与行动), March 28, 2015. Translation; Paul Triolo et al., “The
Digital Silk Road: Expanding China’s Digital Footprint,” April 8, 2020, 4.
   271. Paul Triolo et al., “The Digital Silk Road: Expanding China’s Digital Foot-
print,” April 8, 2020, 4, 5.
   272. Kabir Taneja, ed., “The Dragon in the Sands: Unpacking China’s Presence in
Contemporary West Asia,” Observer Research Foundation, October 2023, 22.
   273. Dalia Parete, “Digital Silk Road,” China Media Project, November 24, 2023.
   274. Zongyuan Zoe Liu, “Tracking China’s Control of Overseas Ports,” Council on
Foreign Relations, August 26, 2024; Alexander Cornwell and Pesha Magid, “Saudi
Fund-Backed Firm Partners with Chinese Surveillance Maker,” Reuters, February
20, 2024; Eleanor Olcott, “ ‘Strings Attached’: Saudi Arabia Steps Up Demands in
Tech Deals with China,” Financial Times, February 19, 2024; Benn Steil, Benjamin
Della Rocca, and Dinah Walker, “Central Bank Currency Swaps Tracker,” Council on
Foreign Relations, Febrary 9, 2024; Fahad Abuljadayel and Yujing Liu, “China and
Saudi Arabia Sign Currency Swap Worth $7 Billion,” Bloomberg, November 20, 2023;
Johana Bhuiyan, “How Chinese Firm Linked to Repression of Uyghurs Aids Israeli
Surveillance in West Bank,” Guardian, November 11, 2023; Mohamed Maher and Mo-
hamed Farid, “The Growth of Chinese Influence in Egypt: Signs and Consequences,”
                                        395
Washington Institute for Near East Policy, April 27, 2023; Emre Demir, “Turkey–Chi-
na Partnership: Is Beijing’s Belt and Road Initiative Not Delivering Enough?” Global
Voices, March 15, 2023; Hector Perez-Saiz and Longmei Zhang, “Renminbi Usage in
Cross-Border Payments: Regional Patterns and the Role of Swap Lines and Offshore
Clearing Banks,” International Monetary Fund, March 2023, 9; James McBride, Noah
Berman, and Andrew Chatzky, “China’s Massive Belt and Road Initiative,” Council
on Foreign Relations, February 2, 2023; Nima Khorrami, “How China Boosts Iran’s
Digital Crackdown,” Diplomat, October 27, 2022; Hiddai Segev, “Smart Cities with
Chinese Characteristics,” Institute for National Security Studies, July 2021; Derek
Scissors, “China Global Investment Tracker,” American Enterprise Institute; Joshua
Kurlantzick et al., “Assessing China’s Digital Silk Road Initiative,” Council on For-
eign Relations; International Cyber Policy Centre, “Mapping China’s Tech Giants,”
Australian Strategic Policy Institute; Dale Aluf, “China’s Digital Footprint Grows in
the Middle East & North Africa,” Mapping Global China; Huawei, “Smart Cities at
the Heart of a Digital Middle East.”
  275. Sophie Zinser, “China’s Digital Silk Road Grows with 5G in the Middle East,”
Diplomat, December 16, 2020.
  276. Noah Berman et al., “Is China’s Huawei a Threat to U.S. National Security?”
Council on Foreign Relations, February 8, 2023.
  277. Andrew Chack, “Analyzing the Entrenchment of Beijing’s Digital Influence in
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates,” Georgetown Security Studies Review,
April 13, 2023.
  278. Tin Hinane El Kadi, “How Huawei’s Localization in North Africa Delivered
Mixed Returns,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, April 2022, 14.
  279. Al Jazeera, “Government Sells 9.5% of State-Controlled Telecom Egypt,” May
14, 2023; Egypt Today, “Telecom Egypt, Huawei Sign $200M Long Term Financing
Agreement,” May 30, 2018.
  280. Doaa A. Moneim, “Telecom Egypt, Huawei Forge Strategic Partnership to De-
ploy 5G Network,” Ahram Online, February 27, 2024; Allison McManus, “Egypt and
China’s Telecoms: A Concerning Courtship,” Power 3.0, February 20, 2020.
  281. Noah Berman, Lindsay Maizland, and Andrew Chatzky, “Is China’s Huawei
a Threat to U.S. National Security?” Council on Foreign Relations, February 8, 2023.
  282. Marissa Newman, Mark Bergen, and Olivia Solon, “Race for AI Supremacy in
Middle East Is Measured in Data Centers,” Bloomberg, April 11, 2024.
  283. Marissa Newman, Mark Bergen, and Olivia Solon, “Race for AI Supremacy in
Middle East Is Measured in Data Centers,” Bloomberg, April 11, 2024; Mandy Qian,
“Data Centers in Greater China—Three Points to Process in 2024,” Cushman and
Wakefield, February 29, 2024; McKinsey and Company, “Investing in the Rising Data
Center Economy,” January 17, 2023; Matthew Gooding, “Newmark: US Data Center
Power Consumption to Double by 2030,” Data Center Dynamics, January 15, 2024;
Jacob Albers, “2024 Global Data Center Market Comparison,” Cushman & Wakefield,
2024, 15.
  284. Marissa Newman, Mark Bergen, and Olivia Solon, “Race for AI Supremacy in
Middle East Is Measured in Data Centers,” Bloomberg, April 11, 2024; Jacob Albers,
“2024 Global Data Center Market Comparison,” Cushman & Wakefield, 2024, 15;
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia Ministry of Communications and Information Technology,
Saudi Arabia Expands Plan to Develop Digital Infrastructure to Build and Enable
Mega Data Centers, October 14, 2021.
  285. Marissa Newman, Mark Bergen, and Olivia Solon, “Race for AI Supremacy
in Middle East Is Measured in Data Centers,” Bloomberg, April 11, 2024; Business
Wire, “United Arab Emirates Data Center Market Investment Analysis & Growth
Opportunities 2024–2029,” March 1, 2024; Business Wire, “Saudi Arabia Data Center
Market Investment Analysis Report 2023: Market to Reach a Value of $2.08 Billion
by 2028,” June 29, 2023.
  286. Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Communications and Media Department, National
Transformation Program Delivery Plan 2021–2025; John Calabrese, “China’s Digital
Inroads into the Middle East,” East Asia Forum, October 19, 2022.
  287. Adam Satariano and Paul Mozur, “ ‘To the Future’: Saudi Arabia Spends Big
to Become an A.I. Superpower,” New York Times, April 26, 2024.
  288. Stephen Anderson et al., “US$320 billion by 2030? The Potential Impact of
Artificial Intelligence in the Middle East,” PwC, 2018, 3, 7.
  289. Adam Satariano and Paul Mozur, “ ‘To the Future’: Saudi Arabia Spends Big
to Become an A.I. Superpower,” New York Times, April 26, 2024.
  290. National News, “President Sheikh Mohamed Announces Artificial Intelligence
Council for Abu Dhabi,” January 22, 2024; Farah Elbahrawy, “Abu Dhabi’s Largest
Firm Adds AI-Powered Observer to Board,” Bloomberg, February 27, 2024.
                                       396
   291. Dayan Abou Tine, “PIF Set to Have $2 Trillion in Assets under Management
by 2030: Report,” Arab News, April 28, 2024.
   292. Global SWF, “Ranking,” June 2024. https://globalswf.com/ranking; Dayan
Abou Tine, “PIF Set to Have $2 Trillion in Assets Under Management by 2030: Re-
port,” Arab News, April 28, 2024; Robert Mogielnicki, “Public Investment Fund Grows,
Bets Big on Tech,” Arab Gulf States Institute in Washington, January 12, 2022.
   293. Public Investment Fund, “Public Investment Fund Program 2021–2025.”
   294. Public Investment Fund, “The Public Investment Fund, SoftBank Group and
Mubadala Joined by Initial Investors in Vision Fund Including Apple, Foxconn, Qual-
comm and Sharp,” May 20, 2017; Robert Mogielnicki, “Public Investment Fund Grows,
Bets Big on Tech,” Arab Gulf States Institute in Washington, January 12, 2022.
   295. Anton Bridge, “SoftBank’s $184 Billion Portfolio Key to Beating AI Rivals,
Says Vision Fund CFO,” Reuters, May 13, 2024; Min Jeong Lee, “SoftBank Sells Off
Vision Fund Assets as Son Pivots to AI, Chips,” Bloomberg, May 9, 2024.
   296. Eleanor Olcott, “Saudi Fund Invests in China Effort to Create Rival to Ope-
nAI,” Financial Times, May 31, 2024.
   297. Eleanor Olcott, “Saudi Fund Invests in China Effort to Create Rival to Ope-
nAI,” Financial Times, May 31, 2024.
   298. Eleanor Olcott, “Saudi Fund Invests in China Effort to Create Rival to Ope-
nAI,” Financial Times, May 31, 2024; Jane Zhang, “Saudi Fund Joins $400 Million
Financing for China AI Firm Zhipu,” Bloomberg, May 31, 2024.
   299. Gregory C. Allen and H. Andrew Schwartz, “AI at the G7 Leaders’ Summit,
Apple and OpenAI’s Partnership, and Saudi Arabia’s Zhipu AI Investment,” Center
for Strategic and International Studies, June 18, 2024, min 18:00.
   300. Jane Zhang, “Saudi Fund Joins $400 Million Financing for China AI Firm
Zhipu,” Bloomberg, May 31, 2024.
   301. Syed Sadain Gardazi, “Saudi Arabia Launches PIF Company ‘Alat’ to Become
Global Electronics, Advanced Industries Hub,” Forbes, February 1, 2024; Bloomberg,
“Saudi Arabia’s US$100 billion Investment Firm Alat Piles into SoftBank and Dahua
Technology,” South China Morning Post, February 21, 2024.
   302. Dahua Technology, “Dahua Announces Joint Venture with Alat to Develop Its
First Overseas Manufacturing Hub in Saudi Arabia,” PR Newswire, February 20,
2024; Jessie Wu, “Lenovo Secures $2 Billion Investment from Saudi Arabia’s Alat,
Establishes Mea Headquarters In Riyadh,” TechNode, May 30, 2024.
   303. Marion Halftermeyer and Mackenzie Hawkins, “Saudi Arabia’s $100 Billion
AI Fund Will Divest China if US Asks,” Bloomberg, May 7, 2024.
   304. Hanna Dohmen and Jacob Feldgoise, “A Bigger Yard, a Higher Fence: Un-
derstanding BIS’s Expanded Controls on Advanced Computing Exports,” Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, December 4, 2023; U.S. Department of Commerce
Bureau of Industry and Security, “Implementation of Additional Export Controls:
Certain Advanced Computing Items; Supercomputer and Semiconductor End Use;
Updates and Corrections,” Federal Register 88:73458 (October 25, 2023); U.S. Secu-
rities and Exchange Commission, Nvidia Corporation Form 8-K, October 17, 2023;
Stephen Nellis and Max A. Cherney, “US Curbs AI Chip Exports from Nvidia and
AMD to Some Middle East Countries,” Reuters, August 31, 2023.
   305. Arash Massoudi and Demetri Sevastopulo, “US Security Officials Scrutinise
Abu Dhabi’s $3bn Fortress Takeover,” Financial Times, July 25, 2023.
   306. Economist, “G42, an Emirati AI Hopeful, Has Big Plans,” June 6, 2024; Ben
Bartnestein, “Abu Dhabi’s G42 Expands Investment Team with Wealth Fund Hires,”
Bloomberg, February 17, 2022.
   307. Lionel Lim, “The White House Explains Why It Liked Microsoft’s Investment
in UAE AI Champion G42: It Got Huawei Out of the Way,” Fortune, June 25, 2024;
Mark Mazzetti and Edward Wong, “Inside U.S. Efforts to Untangle an A.I. Giant’s
Ties to China,” New York Times, November 27, 2023.
   308. Mark Mazzetti and Edward Wong, “Inside U.S. Efforts to Untangle an A.I.
Giant’s Ties to China,” New York Times, November 27, 2023.
   309. U.S. House of Representatives Select Committee on the Strategic Competition
between the United States and the Chinese Communist Party, Gallagher Calls on
USG to Investigate AI Firm, G42, Ties to PRC Military, Intelligence-Linked Compa-
nies, January 9, 2024.
   310. Chloe Cornish and Kaye Wiggins, “Abu Dhabi AI Group G42 Sells Its China
Stakes to Appease US,” Financial Times, February 9, 2024; Michael Peel and Simeon
Kerr, “UAE’s Top AI Group Vows to Phase Out Chinese Hardware to Appease US,”
Financial Times, December 7, 2023.
   311. Lionel Lim, “The White House Explains Why It Liked Microsoft’s Investment
in UAE AI Champion G42: It Got Huawei Out of the Way,” Fortune, June 25, 2024;
                                        397
Microsoft, “Microsoft Invests $1.5 Billion in Abu Dhabi’s G42 to Accelerate AI Devel-
opment and Global Expansion,” April 15, 2024.
   312. Microsoft, “Microsoft Invests $1.5 Billion in Abu Dhabi’s G42 to Accelerate AI
Development and Global Expansion,” April 15, 2024.
   313. Mohammed Soliman, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 61–62.
   314. Yousef Al Otaiba, “AI’s Future Is Being Forged by the US and the UAE,”
Bloomberg, April 30, 2024.
   315. Trevor Hunnicutt and Alexandra Alper, “Microsoft-G42 Deal Positive Because
It Cut Huawei Ties, White House Official Says,” Reuters, June 24, 2024.
   316. Katherine Atha et al., “China’s Smart Cities Development,” SOS Internation-
al LLC (prepared for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission),
January 2020, 1.
   317. Mohammed Soliman and Alicia Chavy, “Transformational Implications of
Moving toward Smart Cities in the Gulf,” Middle East Institute, December 12, 2023;
Paul Mozur, Muyi Xiao, and John Liu, “ ‘An Invisible Cage’: How China Is Policing the
Future,” New York Times, June 25, 2022.
   318. U.S. International Trade Administration, Qatar—Country Commercial Guide,
July 7, 2024; Mohammed Soliman and Alicia Chavy, “Transformational Implications
of Moving Toward Smart Cities in the Gulf,” Middle East Institute, December 12,
2023.
   319. International Institute for Management Development, “IMD Smart City Index
2023,” 2024, 14.
   320. Mohammed Soliman and Alicia Chavy, “Transformational Implications of
Moving Toward Smart Cities in the Gulf,” Middle East Institute, December 12, 2023;
OECD Urban Studies, “Smart City Data Governance: Challenges and the Way For-
ward,” 2023, 9; NEOM, “HRH Prince Mohammed bin Salman Announces THE LINE
at NEOM,” January 10, 2021.
   321. Eleanor Olcott, “ ‘Strings Attached’: Saudi Arabia Steps Up Demands in Tech
Deals with China,” Financial Times, February 19, 2024.
   322. Alexander Cornwell and Pesha Magid, “Saudi Fund-Backed Firm Partners
with Chinese Surveillance Maker,” Reuters, February 20, 2024; Teletimes Interna-
tional, “Huawei Take a ‘Leap’ of Faith with Cloud Commitment in KSA,” February
9, 2022; U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, “Addition
of Certain Entities to the Entity List,” Federal Register 84:54002 (October 9, 2019).
   323. Dale Aluf, “China’s Digital Footprint Grows in the Middle East & North Afri-
ca,” Mapping Global China.
   324. Huawei, “Smart Cities at the Heart of a Digital Middle East.”
   325. Jennifer Kavanagh, “The United States and China in the Multi-Aligned Mid-
dle East,” Institute for Peace and Diplomacy, January 9, 2024; Grant Rumley, written
testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on
China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 5, 13.
   326. Reuters, “Egypt, China Stress Priority of Safety, Security of Red Sea Naviga-
tion,” January 14, 2024.
   327. Alexander Wooley and Sheng Zhang, “Beijing Is Going Places—and Building
Naval Bases,” Foreign Policy, July 27, 2023; Grant Rumley, “China’s Security Pres-
ence in the Middle East,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, October 2022;
Chad Peltier, “China’s Logistics Capabilities for Expeditionary Operations,” Janes
(prepared for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission), April 2020.
   328. Chad Peltier, Tate Nurkin, and Sean O’Connor, “China’s Logistics Capabili-
ties for Expeditionary Operations,” Janes (prepared for the U.S.-China Economic and
Security Review Commission), April 15, 2020, 5, 9–10, 33, 39; Jeffrey Becker et al.,
“China’s Presence in the Middle East and Western Indian Ocean: Beyond Belt and
Road,” Center for Naval Analyses, February 2019, 128.
   329. Howard Wang and Nathan Beauchamp-Mustafaga, “Not Ready for a Fight:
Chinese Military Insecurities for Overseas Bases in Wartime,” RAND Corporation,
June 7, 2024, 7–8.
   330. Grant Rumley, “China’s Security Presence in the Middle East,” Washington
Institute for Near East Policy, October 2022.
   331. Cristina L. Garafola, Stephen Watts, and Kristin J. Leuschner, “China’s Global
Basing Ambitions: Defense Implications for the United States,” RAND Corporation,
December 8, 2022, 12.
   332. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the
People’s Republic of China, October 19, 2023, 154.
   333. Chad Peltier, “China’s Logistics Capabilities for Expeditionary Operations,”
Janes (prepared for the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission),
April 2020, 63.
                                        398
   334. Tuvia Gering, “Full Throttle in Neutral: China’s New Security Architecture for
the Middle East,” Atlantic Council, February 15, 2023; Camille Lons et al., “China’s
Great Game in the Middle East,” European Council on Foreign Relations, October
21, 2019.
   335. Grant Rumley, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 5, 13.
   336. Steven Stashwick, “Chinese Military Experiments with Using Commercial
Vessels as Helicopter Bases,” Diplomat, August 28, 2020; Conor M. Kennedy, “China
Maritime Report No. 4: Civil Transport in PLA Power Projection,” U.S. Naval War
College, 2019.
   337. Conor M. Kennedy, “China Maritime Report No. 4: Civil Transport in PLA
Power Projection,” U.S. Naval War College, 2019; National People’s Congress of the
People’s Republic of China, National Defense Transportation Law of the People’s Re-
public of China (中华人民共和国国防交通法), September 9, 2016. Translation.
   338. Howard Wang and Nathan Beauchamp-Mustafaga, “Not Ready for a Fight:
Chinese Military Insecurities for Overseas Bases in Wartime,” RAND Corporation,
June 7, 2024, 8.
   339. Howard Wang and Nathan Beauchamp-Mustafaga, “Not Ready for a Fight:
Chinese Military Insecurities for Overseas Bases in Wartime,” RAND Corporation,
June 7, 2024, 8, 17; Stacie L. Pettyjohn and Jennifer Kavanagh, “Political Challenges
to the U.S. Overseas Military Presence, 1945–2014,” RAND Corporation, November
21, 2016, xiv–xvi.
   340. Grant Rumley, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 5; Liz Sly,
“China Has Acquired a Global Network of Strategically Vital Ports,” Washington Post,
November 6, 2023.
   341. Cindy Cheng, “China and U.S. Anti-Piracy Engagement in the Gulf of Aden
and Western Indian Ocean Region,” Carter Center, 2019; Grant Rumley, “China’s
Security Presence in the Middle East,” Washington Institute for Near East Policy,
October 2022.
   342. Grant Rumley, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 8; Liu
Xuanzun and Guo Yuandan, “PLA Navy’s Routine Escort Operations Not Related to
Regional Situation: Spokesperson,” Global Times, February 29, 2024; Grant Rumley,
written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hear-
ing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 4.
   343. Dzirhan Mahadzir, “Chinese Navy Piracy Patrol Shepherds Fishing Fleet
through Gulf of Aden,” USNI News, January 6, 2022; Xinhua, “Chinese Naval Fleets
Escort 3400 Foreign Ships over Past 10 Years,” January 1, 2019.
   344. Xinhua, “China Focus: Chinese Navy’s 15-Year Quest for Peace in Gulf of
Aden, Waters Off Somalia,” December 27, 2023; Liu Xuanzun, “PLA Navy Completes
1,600th Escort Mission, Making Concrete Efforts to Safeguard Peace,” Global Times,
December 6, 2023.
   345. Dennis J. Blasko, “Recent Changes in the PLA Navy’s Gulf of Aden Deploy-
ment Pattern,” China Maritime Studies Institute, August 13, 2024, 1.
   346. Dennis J. Blasko, “Recent Changes in the PLA Navy’s Gulf of Aden Deploy-
ment Pattern,” China Maritime Studies Institute, August 13, 2024, 1.
   347. Dennis J. Blasko, “Recent Changes in the PLA Navy’s Gulf of Aden Deploy-
ment Pattern,” China Maritime Studies Institute, August 13, 2024, 1.
   348. Kuwait Times, “Chinese 44th Naval Fleet Docks at Shuwaikh Port,” October
18, 2023; Xinhua, “Xi, Assad Jointly Announce China-Syria Strategic Partnership,”
September 22, 2023; Mordechai Chaziza, “China’s Strategic Partnerships are Remak-
ing the Middle East,” National Review, June 30, 2023; National Defense University,
Institute for National Strategic Studies, “Chinese Military Diplomacy Database Code-
book,” March 31, 2023; Mordechai Chaziza, “China-Bahrain Relations in the Age of
the Belt and Road Initiative,” Institute for National Security Studies, October 2020;
Jonathan Fulton, “Friends with Benefits: China’s Partnership Diplomacy in the Gulf ”
in Shifting Global Politics and the Middle East, March 2019; Kuwait Times, “Chinese
Navy Fleet Arrives at Shuwaikh Port,” February 1, 2017; South China Morning Post,
“Quick Guide to China’s Diplomatic Levels,” January 20, 2016; Stockholm Interna-
tional Peace Research Institute, “SIPRI Arms Transfers Database.”
   349. Léonie Allard, “China Is Testing Its Freeriding Strategy in the Red Sea,” At-
lantic Council, February 13, 2024; Aadil Brar, “Chinese Navy Ignored SOS Call as
US and Ally Stopped Pirate Attack,” Newsweek, November 28, 2023; International
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974.
   350. Aadil Brar, “Chinese Navy Ignored SOS Call as US and Ally Stopped Pirate
Attack,” Newsweek, November 28, 2023; Haley Britzky, “Missiles Fired from Yemen
                                        399
toward US Warship That Responded to Attack on Commercial Tanker,” CNN, No-
vember 27, 2023.
   351. Reuters, “Egypt, China Stress Priority of Safety, Security of Red Sea Naviga-
tion,” January 14, 2024; Jackie Northam, “China Is Mostly Quiet on Houthi Attacks
in the Red Sea,” NPR, February 23, 2024.
   352. Reuters, “Egypt, China Stress Priority of Safety, Security of Red Sea Naviga-
tion,” January 14, 2024; Jackie Northam, “China Is Mostly Quiet on Houthi Attacks
in the Red Sea,” NPR, February 23, 2024.
   353. Mordechai Chaziza, “China’s Response to the Houthi Attacks in the Red Sea,”
Diplomat, January 16, 2024.
   354. Leonie Allard, “China Is Testing Its Freeriding Strategy in the Red Sea,” At-
lantic Council, February 13, 2024.
   355. Jackie Northam, “China Is Mostly Quiet on Houthi Attacks in the Red Sea,”
NPR, February 23, 2024; Jon Alterman, “What the Red Sea Crisis Reveals about
China’s Middle East Strategy,” Foreign Policy, February 14, 2024; Xinhua, “China
Focus: Chinese Navy’s 15-Year Quest for Peace in Gulf of Aden, Waters Off Somalia,”
December 27, 2023.
   356. Zhao Ziwen, “China’s ‘Two Sessions’ 2024: Red Sea Crisis ‘A Big Challenge’ for
Beijing, Says Ambassador,” South China Morning Post, March 8, 2024.
   357. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Wang Yi Makes Clear China’s Position on
the Tension in the Red Sea, China’s Permanent Mission to the United Nations Office
at Geneva, January 14, 2024.
   358. Parisa Hafezi and Andrew Hayley, “Exclusive: China Presses Iran to Rein in
Houthi Attacks in Red Sea, Sources Say,” Reuters, January 25, 2024; Lingling Wei and
Gordon Lubold, “Jake Sullivan to Meet China’s Wang Yi to Discuss Houthi Attacks in
Red Sea,” Wall Street Journal, January 25, 2024.
   359. Reuters, “Exclusive: China Presses Iran to Rein In Houthi Attacks in Red Sea,
Sources Say,” January 26, 2024.
   360. Sam Dagher and Mohammed Hatem, “Yemen’s Houthis Tell China, Russia
Their Ships Won’t Be Targeted,” Bloomberg, March 21, 2024.
   361. Agnes Helou, “Purported Houthi Strike on Chinese Vessel in Red Sea Likely
a ‘Mistake’: Experts,” Breaking Defense, March 25, 2024; Bloomberg, “Houthis Tell
China and Russia Their Ships Won’t Be Targeted in Red Sea,” South China Morning
Post, March 22, 2024; Alex Longley, “Ships Advertise Chinese Links to Avoid Houthi
Attack in Red Sea,” Bloomberg, January 11, 2024.
   362. Zhao Ziwen, “Why China’s Red Sea Diplomatic Mission Is Unlikely to Stop
Houthi Shipping Attacks,” South China Morning Post, March 4, 2024; Lauren Barney
and Aaron Glasserman, “China’s Do-Nothing Strategy in the Middle East,” Foreign
Affairs, June 13, 2024; Ahmed Aboudouh, “Yes, China Pressured Iran on Red Sea
Attacks—but Only to Protect Its Own Ships,” Chatham House, February 7, 2024.
   363. Grant Rumley, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 9.
   364. Grant Rumley, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 9; State
Council the People’s Republic of China, “Full Text: China’s Armed Forces: 30 Years of
UN Peacekeeping Operations,” Xinhua, September 18, 2020.
   365. United Nations Peacekeeping, “Troop and Police Contributions,” March 31,
2024.
   366. China Military Online, “Chinese Peacekeeping Contingent to Lebanon Partic-
ipates in Remote Health Management Training,” February 6, 2024; China Military
Online, “Chinese Peacekeepers to Lebanon Participate in Angel Rescue Exercise,”
May 6, 2023; Zhang Zhe and Li Zhulin, “Chinese Peacekeepers to Lebanon Partici-
pate in Exercise Tiger 2023,” China Military Online, February 13, 2023.
   367. CGTN, “Chinese Peacekeepers in Lebanon Complete Tasks in UN Peacekeep-
ing Exercise,” YouTube, February 14, 2023.
   368. China’s Embassy in the Independent State of Papua New Guinea, Foreign
Ministry Spokesperson Wang Wenbin’s Regular Press Conference on October 13, 2023,
October 13, 2023.
   369. Grant Rumley, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 9; United
Nations Peacekeeping, “Troop and Police Contributions,” March 31, 2024.
   370. United Nations Peacekeeping, “NTSO Fact Sheet,” May 23, 2024; United Na-
tions Peacekeeping, “Troop and Police Contributions,” March 31, 2024.
   371. Xinhua, “Xi Proposes Eight Major Initiatives on China-Arab Practical Coop-
eration,” China Daily, December 10, 2022.
   372. Xinhua, “Xi Proposes Eight Major Initiatives on China-Arab Practical Coop-
eration,” China Daily, December 10, 2022.
                                         400
  373. Grant Rumley, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 9–10.
  374. Grant Rumley, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 9–10.
  375. Takahashi Kosuke, “China and UAE to Conduct First Joint Fighter Jet Drill
in August,” Diplomat, August 2, 2023; Chian’s Ministry of National Defense, China,
UAE Air Forces to Conduct First Joint Training, July 31, 2023.
  376. Agnes Helou, “China, UAE to Hold First-Ever Joint Military Drill, Likely a
‘Message’ to US: Analysts,” Breaking Defense, August 2, 2023.
  377. Albert Vidal Rabe and Joseph Dempsey, “More than a Mirage: UAE Combat
Aircraft in China,” International Institute for Strategic Studies, July 22, 2024; China
Military Online, “China, UAE Air Forces Conduct Second Joint Training,” July 10,
2024.
  378. Albert Vidal Rabe and Joseph Dempsey, “More than a Mirage: UAE Combat
Aircraft in China,” International Institute for Strategic Studies, July 22, 2024.
  379. Jia Siyu et al., “China-Saudi Arabia ‘Blue Sword-2023’ Naval Special Oper-
ations Joint Training Concluded,” China’s Ministry of National Defense, October 27,
2023.
  380. Liu Xuanzun and Guo Yuandan, “China, Saudi Arabia Launch Joint Naval
Special Operations Exercise,” Global Times, October 10, 2023; Seong Hyeon Choi,
“Chinese and Saudi Navies Launch Joint Counterterrorism Exercise against Back-
drop of Israel-Hamas War,” South China Morning Post, October 10, 2023.
  381. Liu Xuanzun and Guo Yuandan, “China, Saudi Arabia Launch Joint Naval
Special Operations Exercise,” Global Times, October 10, 2023.
  382. Seong Hyeon Choi, “Chinese and Saudi Navies Launch Joint Counterterror-
ism Exercise against Backdrop of Israel-Hamas War,” South China Morning Post,
October 10, 2023.
  383. AP News, “China, Russia, Iran Hold Joint Naval Drills in Gulf of Oman,”
March 15, 2023; Dzirhan Mahadzir, “Russia, China and Iran Finish Drills in Gulf of
Oman,” USNI News, March 14, 2024.
  384. AP News, “China, Russia, Iran Hold Joint Naval Drills in Gulf of Oman,”
March 15, 2023; Dzirhan Mahadzir, “Russia, China and Iran Finish Drills in Gulf of
Oman,” USNI News, March 14, 2024.
  385. Grant Rumley, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 9–10.
  386. AP News, “China, Russia, Iran Hold Joint Naval Drills in Gulf of Oman,”
March 15, 2023; Dzirhan Mahadzir, “Russia, China and Iran Finish Drills in Gulf of
Oman,” USNI News, March 14, 2024.
  387. Michael Young, “China’s Middle Eastern Moment,” Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace, June 5, 2023.
  388. Maria Papageorgiou, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3.
  389. Maria Papageorgiou, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 6–7.
  390. Camille Lons et al., “China’s Great Game in the Middle East,” European
Council on Foreign Relations, October 2019.
  391. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Arab Policy Paper, January 13, 2016; Al-
vite Ningthoujam, “The Middle East: An Emerging Market for Chinese Arms Ex-
ports,” Diplomat, June 25, 2021.
  392. Peter Singer, “How China Is Winning the Middle East,” Defense One, Jan-
uary 19, 2024; Paul Iddon, “The U.S. Is Quietly Warning Its Middle East Partners
About the Cost of Stocking Up on Chinese-Made Weapons,” Business Insider, August
17, 2023; U.S. Central Command, U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee Hearing on
Posture of USCENTCOM and USAFRICOM in Review of the Defense Authorization
Request for FY24 and the Future Years Defense Program, March 16, 2023.
  393. Pieter D. Wezeman et al., “Trends in International Arms Transfers, 2023,”
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, March 2024, 11; Maria Mary Pa-
pageorgiou, “China’s Growing Presence in the Middle East’s Arms Race and Security
Dynamics,” Springer Nature Switzerland, 2023, 262; Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute, “Arms Transfers Database.”
  394. Tim Martin and Agnes Helou, “China Makes Presence Felt at Saudi Arabian
Defense Show, Outpacing US, Russia,” Breaking Defense, February 9, 2024; World
Defense Show Saudi Arabia, “Exhibitor List,” 2024.
  395. Tim Martin and Agnes Helou, “China Makes Presence Felt at Saudi Arabian
Defense Show, Outpacing US, Russia,” Breaking Defense, February 9, 2024; World
Defense Show Saudi Arabia, “Exhibitor List,” 2024.
                                        401
  396. Grant Rumley, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 7.
  397. Paul Iddon, “The U.S. Is Quietly Warning Its Middle East Partners about the
Cost of Stocking Up on Chinese-Made Weapons,” Business Insider, August 17, 2023.
  398. Grant Rumley, “China’s Security Presence in the Middle East,” Washington
Institute for Near East Policy, October 2022; Defense Mirror, “Saudi Arabia Deploys
China-Made Laser-Firing Anti-Drone System against Houthi UAVs,” October 25,
2022.
  399. Defense Mirror, “Saudi Arabia Deploys China-Made Laser-Firing Anti-Drone
System against Houthi UAVs,” October 25, 2022.
  400. Jack Lau, “China, UAE Set for Joint Air Force Training in Military First, as
Beijing Forges Closer Middle East Ties,” South China Morning Post, July 13, 2023;
Bradley Bowman et al., “China’s Surprising Drone Sales in the Middle East,” Defense
News, April 23, 2021.
  401. Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, “Arms Transfer Database,”
March 11, 2024; Jack Lau, “China, UAE Set for Joint Air Force Training in Military
First, as Beijing Forges Closer Middle East Ties,” South China Morning Post, July 13,
2023; Bradley Bowman et al., “China’s Surprising Drone Sales in the Middle East,”
Defense News, April 23, 2021.
  402. Maria Papageorgiou, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 7.
  403. Maria Papageorgiou, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 6–7.
  404. Maria Papageorgiou, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 6–7.
  405. Grant Rumley, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 7; Aksha-
ra Parakala, “WDS 2024: AVIC WL-10B to Be Delivered to Royal Saudi Air Force,”
Janes, February 9, 2024.
  406. Aadil Brar, “Iraqi Army Displays New Military Drone Bought from China,”
Newsweek, April 30, 2024.
  407. Awad Mustafa, “Exclusive: Iraq Looks to Buy Chinese ‘Reaper’ Drones,” De-
fense and Security Middle East, April 3, 2023; Evan Berridge, “Chinese CH-5 Rain-
bow Drones Purchased by Iraq Delivered,” Atlas News, April 29, 2024.
  408. Evan Berridge, “Chinese CH-5 Rainbow Drones Purchased by Iraq Delivered,”
Atlas News, April 29, 2024.
  409. Evan Berridge, “Chinese CH-5 Rainbow Drones Purchased by Iraq Delivered,”
Atlas News, April 29, 2024.
  410. Aadil Brar, “Iraqi Army Displays New Military Drone Bought from China,”
Newsweek, April 30, 2024; Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, “Arms
Transfer Database,” October 8, 2024; Defense Mirror, “Iraq Acquires Chinese CH-5
Killer Drones: Reports,” September 23, 2023; Airforce Technology, “Wing Loong Un-
manned Aerial Vehicle (UAV),” February 2, 2021; Christopher Diamond, “China to
Open a Drone Factory in Saudi Arabia,” Defense News, March 28, 2017; Wendell
Minnick, “China Reveals New Missiles at Singapore Airshow,” Defense News, Febru-
ary 16, 2016.
  411. Chris Alden et al., “Wings along the BRI: Exporting Chinese UCAVs and Se-
curity,” London School of Economics, May 28, 2020, 10.
  412. Maria Papageorgiou, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 3.
  413. Evan Berridge, “Chinese CH-5 Rainbow Drones Purchased by Iraq Delivered,”
Atlas News, April 29, 2024; Grant Rumley, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19,
2024, 7.
  414. Grant Rumley, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 7.
  415. Grant Rumley, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 7; U.S. De-
partment of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments
Involving the People’s Republic of China 2019, May 2019, 27–28.
  416. United Against Nuclear Iran, “Iran Tanker Tracking;” Kimberly Donovan and
Maia Nikoladze, “The Axis of Evasion: Behind China’s Oil Trade with Iran and Rus-
sia,” Atlantic Council, March 28, 2024.
  417. Kimberly Donovan and Maia Nikoladze, “The Axis of Evasion: Behind China’s
Oil Trade with Iran and Russia,” Atlantic Council, March 28, 2024.
  418. Jon Alterman, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 31; Jonathan
                                       402
Fulton, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission,
Hearing on China and the Middle East, April 19, 2024, 29.
   419. Mackenzie Hawkins and Ian King, “US Is Slowing AI Chip Exports to Middle
East by Nvidia, AMD,” Bloomberg, May 30, 2024; Hanna Dohmen and Jacob Feld-
goise, “A Bigger Yard, a Higher Fence: Understanding BIS’s Expanded Controls on
Advanced Computing Exports,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, De-
cember 4, 2023; U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security,
“Implementation of Additional Export Controls: Certain Advanced Computing Items;
Supercomputer and Semiconductor End Use; Updates and Corrections,” Federal Reg-
ister 88:73458 (October 25, 2023); U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Nvidia
Corporation Form 8-K, October 17, 2023; Stephen Nellis and Max A. Cherney, “US
Curbs AI Chip Exports from Nvidia and AMD to Some Middle East Countries,” Re-
uters, August 31, 2023.
   420. U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the
People’s Republic of China, October 19, 2023, 154.
