CHAPTER 6: KEY ECONOMIC STRATEGIES FOR
 LEVELING THE U.S.-CHINA PLAYING FIELD
Abstract
   Many of China’s economic, technological, and military policies are
at the expense of and contrary to U.S. and allied interests. Today,
China continues to flood global markets with exports in an attempt
to boost its domestic economic growth while simultaneously pursu-
ing the development of emerging technologies to assert its global
geopolitical interests and spur military modernization. In response,
the United States’ economic approach toward China is evolving to
combat China’s state-led, non-market practices. The United States’
toolkit for addressing these challenges includes trade policy tools,
such as tariffs on imports from China, controls on the transfer of
technology, and restrictions on inbound and outbound investment
that might advance China’s development of sensitive technologies.
At the same time, there remains a lack of consensus on the scope
and implementation of these measures. Lacking an overarching set
of objectives and a comprehensive strategy for achieving them, some
policies are implemented at cross-purposes, weakening the United
States’ approach to economic competition with China. Unlike the
National Security Strategy (NSS), the United States does not yet
have a unified strategy organizing its approach to economic security.
The effectiveness of the United States’ economic security strategy
faces further limits at present from a lack of data and analytic ca-
pabilities as well as a lack of adequate alignment of policies with
key allies and partners.
Key Findings
 • U.S. trade policy is a key tool for defending against China’s
   non-market economic practices, diversifying U.S. supply chains,
   and preserving U.S. economic security.
 • Efforts to de-risk supply chains are undermined by a lack of a
   cohesive trade policy as well as the continued presence of Chi-
   nese value-added content in non-Chinese imports.
 • As China increasingly asserts itself as a significant military
   power, export controls have emerged as a central tool in U.S.
   efforts to deny China direct access to critical dual-use goods
   and advancements in national security-sensitive technologies.
   However, a number of operational challenges diminish their
   effectiveness, including lack of coordination among key allies,
   compliance challenges, and uneven enforcement.
 • While Congress in 2018 strengthened the U.S. inbound invest-
   ment screening mechanism, it considered but did not implement
   matching rules on outbound investments. In the last few years,
                                (403)
                                 404

    policymakers have actively explored creating an outbound in-
    vestment screening mechanism. Such a mechanism would curb
    important U.S. economic support to China’s advanced technol-
    ogy ambitions, such as the transfer of management expertise,
    know-how, and capital that is unaddressed by the United States’
    existing toolkit, including a yet-to-be-implemented executive or-
    der (EO).
  • A lack of adequate detailed data on U.S. trade and investment
    flows poses an acute challenge to effective policy scoping and
    implementation.
  • Economic partners in the G7 and other developed markets
    have implemented trade measures to address trade distortions
    caused by China’s state-led economy; these measures continue
    to evolve. They are also exploring parallel export controls and
    outbound investment screening policies to limit the flow of key
    technologies. At times, the United States has had difficulty ob-
    taining alignment with allies, which can undercut the effective-
    ness of U.S. policy and put U.S. companies at a disadvantage.
Recommendations
The Commission recommends:
 • Congress consider legislation to eliminate federal tax expendi-
    tures for investments in Chinese companies on the Entity List
    maintained by the U.S. Department of Commerce, or identified
    as a Chinese military company on either the “Non-Specially
    Designated National (SDN) Chinese Military-Industrial Com-
    plex Companies List” maintained by the U.S. Department of the
    Treasury or the “Chinese military companies” list maintained
    by the U.S. Department of Defense. Among the tax expenditures
    that would be eliminated prospectively are the preferential cap-
    ital gains tax rate, the capital loss carry-forward provisions, and
    the treatment of carried interest.
 • To enhance the effectiveness of export controls, Congress should:
   ○ Improve the analytic and enforcement capabilities of the U.S.
       Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security
       (BIS) by providing resources necessary to hire more in-house
       experts; establish a Secretary’s Fellows Program to more ef-
       fectively attract interagency talent; expand partnerships with
       the national labs; increase access to data and data analysis
       tools, including the acquisition of proprietary datasets and
       modern data analytic systems; and hire additional agents and
       analysts for the Office of Export Enforcement.
   ○ Amend the Export Control Reform Act to require that within
       30 days of granting a license for export to entities on the
       Entity List, including under the Foreign Direct Product Rule,
       BIS shall provide all relevant information about the license
       approval to the relevant congressional committees, subject to
       restrictions on further disclosure under 50 U.S.C. § 4820(h)(2)
       (B)(ii).
   ○ Direct the president to:
                               405

      Designate a senior official to coordinate efforts across the
        Administration to prioritize bilateral and multilateral sup-
        port for U.S. export control initiatives; and
      Establish a Joint Interagency Task Force, reporting to and
        overseen by the national security advisor and with its own
        budget and staff, to assess ways to achieve the goal of lim-
        iting China’s access to and development of advanced tech-
        nologies that pose a national security risk to the United
        States. The task force should include designees from the
        U.S. Departments of Commerce, Defense, State, Treasury,
        and Energy; the intelligence community; and other relevant
        agencies. It should assess the effectiveness of existing ex-
        port controls; provide advice on designing new controls and/
        or using other tools to maximize their effect while mini-
        mizing their negative impact on U.S. and allied economies;
        and recommend new authorities, institutions, or interna-
        tional arrangements in light of the long-term importance
        of U.S.-China technology competition.
  ○ Codify the “Securing the Information and Communications
     Technology and Services Supply Chain” Executive Order to
     ensure that as the authority is used more robustly, challenges
     to its status as an executive order will not constrain BIS’s
     implementation decisions or delay implementation.
• Congress direct the Administration to create an Outbound In-
  vestment Office within the executive branch to oversee invest-
  ments into countries of concern, including China. The office
  should have a dedicated staff and appropriated resources and
  be tasked with:
  ○ Prohibiting outbound U.S. investment through a sector-based
     approach in technologies the United States has identified as
     a threat to its national or economic security;
  ○ Expanding the list of covered sectors with the goal of aligning
     outbound investment restrictions with export controls. The of-
     fice should identify and refine the list of covered technologies
     in coordination with appropriate agencies as new innovations
     emerge; and
  ○ Developing a broader mandatory notification program for sec-
     tors where investment is not prohibited to allow policymakers
     to accumulate visibility needed to identify potential high-risk
     investments and other sectors that pose a threat to U.S. na-
     tional or economic security. In addition to direct investments,
     the notification regime should capture passive investment
     flows to help inform debates around the expansion of prohibi-
     tions to cover portfolio investment.
• Congress repeal Permanent Normal Trade Relations (PNTR) for
  China. The PNTR status allows China to benefit from the same
  trade terms as U.S. allies, despite engaging in practices such as
  intellectual property theft and market manipulation. Repealing
  PNTR could reintroduce annual reviews of China’s trade prac-
  tices, giving the United States more leverage to address unfair
  trade behaviors. This move would signal a shift toward a more
                              406

  assertive trade policy aimed at protecting U.S. industries and
  workers from economic coercion.
• Congress direct relevant departments and agencies to expand
  their data collection and transparency initiatives into the vol-
  ume and types of investment flowing into China by taking the
  following actions:
  ○ Amending the International Investment and Trade in Ser-
     vices Survey Act to require the Bureau of Economic Analy-
     sis within the U.S. Department of Commerce to publish more
     detailed sectoral breakdowns of U.S. direct investment in
     China on a nationality basis and the U.S. Department of the
     Treasury to publish annual sector breakdowns of U.S. portfo-
     lio investment in China on a nationality basis. The portfolio
     investment sectors should be more specific than those provid-
     ed by the Commerce Department for direct investment. Ad-
     ditionally, Congress should require the Treasury Department
     to publish quarterly updates—without sector breakdowns—of
     nationality-based portfolio investment in China.
  ○ Requiring the U.S. Department of Commerce to produce a
     report on the feasibility and methodology for publishing na-
     tionality-based results for direct investment, where offshore
     tax havens and locales of incorporation would not be said to
     receive hundreds of billions of dollars and true destinations
     of the capital would be accurately identified.
• Congress direct the Administration to impose sanctions on
  Chinese financial institutions that violate sanctions, includ-
  ing those that are proven to be working with or supporting
  the Russian military industrial base or facilitating purchases
  of Iranian oil.
• In light of the periodic and increasingly frequent removal of
  some of these materials from Chinese websites, Congress direct
  the executive branch to fund the creation and operation of a
  regularly updated, permanent data archive, in effect a series
  of snapshots of portions of the Chinese internet. In the past
  decade, foreign analysts have made use of open source Chi-
  nese-language materials to gain insight into various aspects of
  current policy as well as internal (but unclassified) discussions
  of future military, diplomatic, and economic strategy. Informa-
  tion would be stored in the permanent data archive, accessible
  to both government and private analysts.
• Congress consider legislation to set priorities and goals for
  U.S.-China economic relations. These policy priorities and goals
  should include:
  ○ Updating existing trade and economic tools to ensure their
     timely application, utility, and effectiveness in countering
     China’s non-market economic policies;
  ○ Limiting U.S. economic and security dependence on supply
     chains in critical and emerging products, technologies, and
     services provided by companies controlled, operating in, or
     subject to the influence of China;
                                407

    ○ Enhancing the accountability of the executive branch to Con-
      gress and increasing the transparency of its actions to ensure
      coordinated governmental action and respect for Congress’s
      constitutional Article I, Section 8 authority;
    ○ Prioritizing domestic production and employment while also
      recognizing the need, as appropriate, to coordinate and align
      policies with friends and allies;
    ○ Acting to address production overcapacity fueled by Chinese
      policies and actions; and
    ○ Advancing the resilience of the U.S. economy and ensuring its
      access to key inputs and technologies.
 • Congress pass legislation eliminating the ability of entities op-
   erating in U.S. Foreign-Trade Zones (FTZs) to qualify for zero
   or lower tariffs on products imported from China or Chinese-af-
   filiated or -invested entities into the FTZ and then reexported.
 • The relevant committees of Congress hold hearings to assess
   the desirability and feasibility of creating a trade defense coa-
   lition with other like-minded countries to forestall the risk of a
   second China shock. Such a grouping would seek to align poli-
   cies for responding to the recent acceleration in China’s exports
   of subsidized, underpriced materials and manufactured goods.
Introduction
   In recent years, U.S. policymakers have begun to rethink many of
the assumptions that undergirded the previous several decades of
trade and economic engagement with China. While China undertook
some measures to reform its economy in ways to promote private
enterprise and foreign investment, such measures invariably proved
secondary to the Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP) core goals of
remaining in power, strengthening its economy and military power
and growing China’s global influence. The CCP never intended to
cede control of China’s economy to market forces.
   Early indications suggest that attempts by the United States to
limit China’s access to and development of certain dual-use and
foundational technologies, promote de-risking, and address econom-
ic distortions and unfair trade practices from China have had some
success. But even as a growing array of policy tools are being de-
ployed to evolve U.S. economic, trade, and related national security
policy toward China, the U.S. economy remains deeply intertwined
with China’s. There is a need for a more comprehensive policy re-
alignment—including a review of trade tools, export controls, and
investment restrictions—as well as a significantly greater effort to
align these measures with those of allies and like-minded countries
in order to ensure their efficacy.
   This chapter begins with a review of how China continues to pur-
sue its economic interests in ways inconsistent with global norms
of fair trade. The chapter then reviews the United States’ response
to China’s action across three arenas: trade policy, export controls,
and investment screening. The chapter draws on the Commission’s
May 2024 hearing on “Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the
                                 408

U.S.-China Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology,” con-
sultations with experts, and open source research and analysis.
Economic Security as a Whole-of-Government
  Approach
   Over the past three decades, U.S. economic policy toward China
was substantially developed and implemented in functional silos.
The United States tailored policy approaches based on explicit con-
cerns—such as specific market access challenges, intellectual prop-
erty (IP) theft, or steel and aluminum overcapacity—so as not to de-
rail broader economic cooperation or to slow what was widely hoped
to be a process of liberalization by China.1
   Given this, U.S. strategy and implementation of its key econom-
ic tools were also siloed. U.S. officials were aware that China’s
non-market economic practices frequently advantaged Chinese com-
panies at the expense of U.S. firms and workers and resulted in
significant shifts in supply chains. However, optimism that a com-
plex and interdependent global economy would deter conflict and
liberalize China tempered the U.S. response and kept the focus on
more narrow industry-specific issues or better enforcement of exist-
ing trade rules.2 Similarly, despite periodic concerns that technology
transfers might be assisting the People’s Liberation Army’s military
modernization drive, until very recently this was viewed as an issue
for narrow export controls on weapons and dual-use products, not
a reason to broadly challenge China’s innovation ecosystem or limit
flows of U.S. capital and know-how that helped build up China’s
technological capabilities in critical and emerging technologies.3
   Many policymakers have come to believe that the size, scale, and
complexity of China’s challenge to U.S. interests requires more in-
tense coordination between economic and national security goals.4
The United States, however, has not reshaped its architecture of
economic tools accordingly despite a consensus that China is now
a whole-of-government problem.5 While the United States has pur-
sued numerous actions to refine and improve the tools it uses to
address the trade, technology, and investment challenges it faces
from China, its actions remain fundamentally siloed.
   U.S. export controls on advanced chips illustrate the risks of the
current approach. The U.S. government restricts advanced semicon-
ductor technologies aimed to limit China’s military modernization.
Whatever their impact on China’s ability to achieve progress on
artificial intelligence (AI) and supercomputing, U.S. export controls
have evidently pushed Chinese chip makers to focus additional ef-
forts on legacy chip production.6 However, trailing-edge—or lega-
cy—chips are also critical to U.S. and allied commercial and military
supply chains.7 Chinese dominance of the sector is thus incongruent
with U.S. strategic goals.8 Expanding export controls would likely
be ineffective for this problem. China has secure access to the tech-
nology necessary for legacy production and already accounts for 30
percent of worldwide manufacturing capacity.9 Instead, other tools
will be needed to address the United States’ strategic objectives of
maintaining an edge in the most advanced semiconductors while
avoiding excessive dependence on China for legacy chips.10
                                  409

  The United States publishes a comprehensive National Security
Strategy (NSS) that helps provide guiding principles and goals, co-
herence, and coordination across disparate government efforts for
myriad U.S. national security policies.11 The NSS also helps provide
important messaging and coordination with key allies and partners.
The most recent NSS repeatedly mentioned economic issues vis-
à-vis U.S. competition with and the national security threat from
China. These issues span China’s non-market abuses and economic
coercion, China’s partially closed economy and growing technolog-
ical capabilities, and China’s global economic importance and the
benefits it reaps from the open international economic order.12 Yet
even with this recognition of China-related challenges, there is no
comparable strategy on the economic side that defines a clear set
of principles and goals to guide restructuring of the United States’
economic relationship with China, foster coordination across varied
departments and policy tools, and drive development of the tools
that will be needed.
Deploying Tariffs and Other Trade Measures
Emerging Consensus on Trade Policy Objectives toward
     China
  Key priorities of U.S. trade policy since 1945, according to the Con-
gressional Research Service, have included “(1) fostering economic
growth and securing more open, equitable, and reciprocal market
access for U.S. exports and investment; (2) protecting U.S. producers
from unfair foreign trade practices and rapid surges in fairly traded
imports; and (3) strengthening the rules-based multilateral trading
system to help achieve the above objectives and further U.S. for-
eign policy.” 13 Since 2017, however, the focus of U.S. trade policy has
shifted in significant ways as the United States pivoted to address
what it saw as rising economic challenges and flaws in the previous
policy framework, particularly vis-à-vis China.14 The United States
has increasingly deployed its trade policy instruments to address
three areas in the U.S.-China economic relationship:
  • China’s harmful economic practices: Since China joined the
     WTO, the United States has largely sought to address the costs
     to the U.S. economy from China’s non-market practices through
     bilateral engagement and multilateral mechanisms. Beijing’s
     harmful policies include unfair subsidies, access to free or sub-
     sidized credit, and other non-trade barriers; coercive IP transfer
     and theft; and protectionism and market access restrictions.15
     Distortions in China’s system have often led to significant over-
     capacity, which, when combined with the open international
     trading system, has enabled China’s export-led growth model
     and injured market-based producers in other countries.16 In
     2018, Section 301 tariffs were unilaterally imposed to make
     progress on these issues. This marked a shift from a previous
     approach based on bilateral and multilateral frameworks.17
  • Supply chain resilience: In response to growing geopolitical ten-
     sions and, later, shocks related to the COVID-19 pandemic, the
     United States has intensified its efforts to address supply chain
     risks and reduce reliance on Chinese production. As economist
                                             410

      Emily Blanchard observes, governments are no longer just in-
      terested in what goods and services enter or are sold within
      their borders but also are looking to reshape patterns of produc-
      tion occurring outside their borders and even before domestic
      firms may be involved, an approach that was not deeply consid-
      ered when the WTO framework was established.18
  • The intersection of economic and national security: In recent
    years, U.S. trade policy has aimed to address the United States’
    persistent and massive trade deficit with China, the loss of U.S.
    jobs and industry, and potential national security concerns aris-
    ing from trade-related harm to domestic industries such as steel
    and aluminum.19 Ongoing policy debates center on how to de-
    ploy trade measures to ensure the United States does not lose
    critical industries to low-cost, state-supported, and non-market-
    based competition from China.
Recent U.S. Trade Measures
   Since 2017, the United States has promulgated a complex web of
trade measures to mitigate harms from Chinese imports in an at-
tempt to create a more level playing field. Authorities under Section
301 of the Trade Act of 1974 were used to undertake an expansion
in tariffs that was unprecedented in recent history. Alongside these
actions, the United States also turned to Section 201 of the Trade
Act of 1974 and Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act to protect
domestic industry, including from harmful Chinese economic prac-
tices. At the same time, U.S. industry expanded use of quasi-judicial
trade remedy tools such as antidumping investigations, which were
the source of most pre-2017 additional tariffs on imports from China
following its accession to the WTO.20 By the end of 2020, the United
States’ trade-weighted average tariff on Chinese products (including
antidumping duties) was 26.7 percent, compared to 8.4 percent at
the start of 2018.* 21
Section 201 Action on Washing Machines and Solar Panels
   On February 7, 2018, the United States placed duties on imports
of washing machines and solar cells and modules under Section 201
of the Trade Act of 1974, the first imposition of Section 201 tariffs
since 2001.22 According to economic historian Douglas Irwin, Sec-
tion 201 was meant to be “the principal means by which industries
harmed by imports could receive temporary relief from foreign com-
petition.” 23 If the U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC) de-
termines following an investigation that a product’s import volume
is a “substantial cause of serious injury, or the threat thereof, to
the domestic industry,” the U.S. president can then decide to impose
trade restrictions.24 Relief under Section 201 is meant to serve as
a temporary “global” safeguard, meaning import restrictions for a
particular product or industry are applied to imports from all coun-
  * The antidumping and countervailing duties (AD/CVD) assessed by the United States tended
to be substantially higher than tariffs under Section 301. The average tariff without accounting
for these trade remedies rose from 3.1 percent in January 2018 to 19.3 percent in December 2020,
reflecting that Section 301 and other trade authorities were the primary drivers of the increase.
Chad P. Bown, “U.S.-China Trade War Tariffs: An Up-to-Date Chart,” Peterson Institute for Inter-
national Economics, April 6, 2023.
                                              411

tries.* 25 Although these safeguard duties enable the United States
to deal with temporary import surges in a way that is compliant
with the WTO’s safeguard provisions, the authority has seen limited
use. This is partially because the standard of “substantial cause” has
proven difficult to establish, while its requirement of “serious injury”
entails a much more onerous burden of proof than the equivalent
standard in antidumping and countervailing duties (AD/CVD) pro-
ceedings.26
   After the USITC concluded two investigations on imports of wash-
ing machines and solar products, the U.S. government placed tariffs
of up to 50 percent on residential washers and initial tariffs of 30
percent on certain solar cells and modules.† 27 Though the Section
201 duties on residential washers ended in February 2023,‡ the
measures on solar products were renewed in February 2022 to last
until 2026 (see textbox below).28

     Overlapping Trade Measures in the Solar Industry
   The numerous trade measures covering solar cells and mod-
 ules illustrates the wide-ranging playbook the United States is
 employing to counter unfair Chinese trade practices. Christian
 Roseland, an analyst at Clean Energy Associates, identifies seven
 separate U.S. trade actions (including repeated use of AD/CVD
 statutes) covering solar products that remain in effect.29 These
 measures include:
   • AD/CVD orders: The United States now enforces three sepa-
     rate AD/CVD orders related to Chinese solar production, and
     an additional investigation was launched in 2024. In 2012,
     the U.S. Department of Commerce placed AD/CVD on all so-
     lar cells from China.30 In 2015, the Commerce Department
     issued a new AD/CVD order covering solar modules assem-
     bled in China, regardless of where the solar cells originat-
     ed, and it also placed an antidumping order on Taiwan in
     response to Chinese companies establishing manufacturing
     facilities on the island.31 In 2022, the Commerce Department
     found that Chinese companies were routing covered solar
     products through Cambodia, Malaysia, Thailand, and Viet-
     nam to circumvent the AD/CVD order, although additional
     duties on these imports were waived until June 2024.32 Most
     recently, in May 2024, the Commerce Department initiated,
     at the request of petitioners, a new AD/CVD case aimed at
     imports from various Southeast Asian countries that are not
     otherwise subject to the circumvention finding.33 The inves-

   * As a result, Section 201 duties generally cannot be evaded through transshipment, an illicit
activity that undermines other trade authorities like AD/CVD orders, which target imports on a
country-specific basis. Specific countries are sometimes exempted from Section 201 duties.
   † As temporary measures, both tariffs were scheduled to be gradually phased out over a number
of years. In addition, the Administration used tariff-rate quotas, which allow a limited number
of goods to enter at a lower tariff rate. U.S. Trade Representative, Fact Sheet: Section 201 Cases:
Imported Large Residential Washing Machines and Imported Solar Cells and Modules.
   ‡ In its statutorily required evaluation of the Section 201 washing machine duties, the USITC
assessed that the duties led to a decline in imports of residential washers and an increase in U.S.
industry’s market share and financial performance between 2018 and 2022, with LG Electron-
ics USA, Inc. and Samsung Electronic Home Appliance America, LLC emerging as the primary
beneficiaries. U.S. International Trade Commission, Large Residential Washers: Evaluation of the
Effectiveness of Import Relief, August 2023, 1.
                                              412

     Overlapping Trade Measures in the Solar Industry—
                               Continued
      tigation includes alleged instances of transnational subsidies
      provided by Chinese policy banks.34 Prior to 2024, the Unit-
      ed States did not countervail subsidies provided by a gov-
      ernment to firms operating in another country.35 (For more
      on the Commerce Department’s changing approach to trans-
      national subsidies, see Chapter 4, “Unsafe and Unregulated
      Chinese Consumer Goods: Challenges in Enforcing Import
      Regulations and Laws.”)
   • Safeguard duties: In January 2018, the United States placed
      a tariff-rate quota on imports of solar cells and modules from
      all countries—though China was among the largest sourc-
      es of covered products—for an initial period of four years,
      which was extended for another four-year period in 2022.36
      Between 2019 and 2024, bifacial (i.e., two-sided) solar cells,
      a product predominantly used in large-scale utility projects,
      were granted an exclusion from the safeguard action; the U.S.
      government terminated the moratorium in May 2024 after
      imports of the product continued to surge.* 37
   • Section 301: Solar cells and modules were included in the du-
      ties imposed after the Section 301 investigation into China’s
      technology transfer, IP, and innovation policies. In May 2024,
      the U.S. government announced that it would double the tar-
      iffs on certain solar products from 25 percent to 50 percent as
      part of the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative’s (USTR)
      four-year review of the Section 301 action.38
   • Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act (UFLPA): The UFLPA
      creates a rebuttable presumption that goods produced in
      Xinjiang are made using forced labor and therefore barred
      from importation.39 The United States has used the UFLPA
      to seize over a thousand shipments of solar products, pre-
      sumably because they use polysilicon originating from the
      region.40
    In total, imports subject to these trade measures face an effec-
 tive tariff between 91 percent and 286 percent.41 Other products,
 such as steel, aluminum, and semiconductors, are also subject to
 duties under multiple authorities.† 42




   * The Trump Administration also attempted to revoke the exclusion at the end of 2020, one year
after introducing it. However, the U.S. Court of International Trade ruled in 2021 that revocation
fell outside of the president’s authority and reinstated the exclusion. President Joe Biden elected
to maintain the exclusion in 2022 when extending the safeguard measures. In 2023, a federal
appeals court overturned the Court of International Trade’s finding, ruling that the president
does have authority to terminate exclusions from the tariff. Jennifer A. Dlouhy, “Biden Seeks to
Bolster Solar Manufacturers with Tax and Trade Moves,” Bloomberg, May 16, 2024.
   † These overlapping measures, however, create a complex regulatory environment, and industry
representatives have asserted that uncertainty about future duties undermines efforts to create
resilient supply chains. Clean Energy Associates and American Council on Renewable Energy,
“Potential Impacts of the 2024 Antidumping and Countervailing Duties on the U.S. Solar Indus-
try,” July 9, 2024, 26.
                                               413

Section 232
   Another trade policy tool the United States has deployed is Sec-
tion 232 of the 1962 Trade Expansion Act, which authorizes ac-
tions when the quantity or circumstances of specific imports pose
a threat to U.S. national security.* 43 Between 2001 and 2017, no
Section 232 investigations were conducted.† 44 Since 2017, however,
nine new investigations have been initiated into imports of steel,
aluminum, automobiles and automobile parts, and other metals and
components.45 In seven of these cases, the Commerce Department
determined that subject imports posed national security threats, but
because Section 232 remedies are viewed as extraordinary, only two
of these investigations led to tariff actions.46 The steel and alumi-
num Section 232 investigations resulted in import tariffs of 25 per-
cent and 10 percent, respectively.‡ 47
Section 301
  To date, Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974 has been the most
versatile and significant tool for responding to China’s non-market
policies. Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974 provides the USTR
broad discretion to suspend trade agreement concessions or impose
import restrictions if a U.S. trading partner is found violating com-
mitments or engaging in an act, practice, or policy that is “unreason-
able or discriminatory and burdens or restricts [U.S.] commerce.” 48
Prior to 2017, Section 301 had largely fallen out of use as a trade
remedy tool, with 119 investigations having occurred from 1975 to
2000 and only five between 2000 and 2016.§ 49 The USTR initiat-
ed a broad Section 301 investigation in August 2017 into China’s
technology transfer, IP, and innovation policies. That investigation
ultimately became the basis for the United States to impose signif-
icant tariffs on two-thirds of all imports from China in four waves
of tariff actions between July 2018 and September 2019, impact-
ing $335 billion in trade ¶ with duties ranging between 7.5 percent
  * Although a wide variety of actors may trigger the initiation of a Section 232 investigation—in-
cluding any “interested party,” the head of “any department or agency,” and the secretary of com-
merce—investigations have historically been rare. Brock Williams of the Congressional Research
Service notes that prior to the 2017 investigations under the Trump Administration, Section
232 action was last taken in 1986, with a total of just 26 investigations and six actual trade en-
forcement action occurring before 2017. Brock R. Williams, “Trump Administration Tariff Actions:
Frequently Asked Questions,” Congressional Research Service CRS R 45249, May 18, 2021, 5.
  † The use of Section 232 gives the Commerce Department and the president broad authority
to examine imports that may threaten national security but otherwise would not be prohibited
under the terms of existing trade agreements or the WTO. The majority of the Section 232 in-
vestigations took place during the height of the Cold War in response to increased threats facing
U.S. national security. Doug Palmer, “The Cold War Origins of Trump’s Favorite Trade Weapon,”
Politico, July 5, 2018.
  ‡ The tariffs were not just aimed at China; initially they were imposed on most steel and alumi-
num imports into the United States. Various countries, including the EU, Japan, and the United
Kingdom, later negotiated tariff suspensions on set volumes of imports. China along with other
trading partners raised a WTO case against the Section 232 tariffs in 2018. The initial findings
of the panel concurred that the Section 232 tariffs went beyond the scope of allowed national
security measures under the WTO, and the United States has appealed the case, effectively stop-
ping further developments in the decision-making progress. Alan H. Price et al., “United States
Notifies Intent to Appeal WTO Panel Reports on Section 232 Steel and Aluminum Measures,”
Wiley, January 30, 2023; Rachel F. Fefer et al., “Section 232 Investigations: Overview and Issues
for Congress,” Congressional Research Service CRS R 45249, May 18, 2021, 8–11, 41–44.
  § Among the five Section 301 investigations, in 2010 the Obama Administration launched an
investigation into China’s policies affecting green technologies, following industry petition. Office
of the U.S. Trade Representative, United States Launches Section 301 Investigation into China’s
Policies Affecting Trade and Investment in Green Technologies, October 15, 2010.
  ¶ These figures are relative to 2017 levels, and the targeted products amounted to 66 percent
of all imports from China. The United States announced plans to implement tariffs on another
                                              414

and 25 percent.* 50 Between July 2018 and May 2024, the United
States assessed $215 billion in duties under the Section 301 action,
or roughly $36 billion per year.51 For comparison, U.S. Customs and
Border Protection collected $35 billion in duties across all countries
and trade authorities in fiscal year (FY) 2017.52 According to Ja-
mieson Greer, a partner in the International Trade team at King
& Spalding, these tariffs were a key piece of a new approach and
enforcement posture toward China that aimed to “level the playing
field and potentially create an environment where negotiations for
improved terms of trade were possible.” 53
   In May 2024, the United States modified the Section 301 tariffs
to respond to emerging sources of Chinese overcapacity. Following
the completion of a review of the 2018–2019 tariffs, the USTR de-
termined to continue the Section 301 duties already in place while
announcing new tariffs on products that “are targeted by China for
dominance or are sectors where the U.S. has recently made signif-
icant investments.” 54 These tariffs notably included a 100 percent
tariff on made-in-China electric vehicles (EVs), effectively doubling
the cost of importing an EV from China.† 55 The EV duties are
intended to align with ongoing U.S. efforts to boost domestic EV
production and promote EV production jobs in the United States,
which could otherwise be uncompetitive with low-cost vehicles sold
by BYD and other Chinese EV automakers that have benefited from
years of heavy subsidies.56 Additional tariffs were also placed on
imports of Chinese EV batteries, personal protective equipment, cer-
tain critical minerals, semiconductors, and ship-to-shore cranes.57
These actions placed tariffs on an additional $18 billion in imports
from China, though many have extended phase-in periods.58 As a
reflection of Section 301’s newly elevated role in U.S. trade strategy
toward China, the USTR is considering the need for further action
under the statute. In April 2024, the USTR launched a new Section
301 investigation into China’s practices in the shipbuilding, mari-
time, and logistics sectors.‡ 59
The “Phase One” Trade Deal
  The Section 301 tariffs became the basis for broad negotiations
with China over a variety of trade issues. In January 2020, these ne-
gotiations culminated in a trade agreement with China, often called
the “Phase One” Economic and Trade Deal, wherein China agreed
to address key U.S. concerns in exchange for a reduction in Section
301 tariffs.§ 60 China agreed to enhance IP protections, terminate
roughly $151 billion in goods in December 2019, but it suspended this action because of ongoing
trade negotiations with Beijing. Chad P. Bown, “The U.S. China Trade War and Phase One Agree-
ment,” Peterson Institute for International Economics, February 2021, 13, 28.
  * The list of Section 301 tariffs issued in September 2019 applied an initial duty of 10 percent
to $120 billion in Chinese goods. This tariff was reduced to 7.5 percent as part of the Phase One
trade agreement. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, United States and China Reach Phase
One Trade Agreement, December 13, 2019.
  † U.S. imports of EVs from China totaled $368 million in 2023, equal to 2 percent of the U.S.’s
imports of EVs from all sources. U.S. Census Bureau, USA Trade Online, September 9, 2024.
  ‡ A recent paper that constructs an economic model of Chinese subsidies found that China’s
shipbuilding industry received $86 billion (renminbi [RMB] 624 billion) in subsidies, and this
policy support caused Chinese shipbuilders to increase their global market share by 40 percent.
Panle Jia Barwick, Myrto Kalouptsidi, and Nahim Zahur, “Industrial Policy Implementation: Em-
pirical Evidence from China’s Shipbuilding Industry,” NBER Working Paper, December 2023, 4.
  § As part of the Phase One agreement, the United States reduced the tariff for products on
“List 4A,” referring to Section 301 actions the USTR took to expand the Section 301 action in
September 2019. The duty rate for this subset of goods was reduced from 15 percent to 7.5 per-
                                              415

policies that force technology transfer from U.S. companies, and
increase purchases of certain U.S. products by specified amounts,
among other commitments.
   While the COVID-19 pandemic created global disruptions that re-
sulted in a significant change to economic conditions, China fell far
short of fulfilling its commitment to purchase an additional $200 bil-
lion worth of U.S. products over 2017 levels before the end of 2021.
According to calculations by economist Chad Bown,* China’s pur-
chases of covered products reached only 58 percent of its purchase
commitments by the end of 2021.61 Even aside from the purchasing
commitments, however, the USTR assessed that China has failed to
meet many of its Phase One obligations. Though China’s 2020 im-
plementation of the Foreign Investment Law and 2021 amendments
to the Copyright Law, Patent Law, and Criminal Law partially met
or fulfilled some of the elements of the Phase One deal, many tech-
nology transfer-related policies continue. In its Statutory Four-Year
Review of the Section 301 measures, the USTR stated, “Instead of
pursuing fundamental reform, the Chinese government largely took
superficial measures aimed at addressing negative perceptions of
its technology transfer-related acts, policies, and practices. At the
same time, China has persisted and even become more aggressive,
particularly through cyber intrusions and cybertheft, in its attempts
to acquire and absorb foreign technology.” 62
Effects and Consequences of U.S. Trade Action on China
   U.S. trade policy since 2017 has had wide-ranging impacts on the
U.S. economy and promoted specified trade objectives to varying de-
grees. In its statutory review of the China Section 301 tariff action
in 2024, the USTR assesses that the Section 301 tariffs were “ef-
fective in encouraging China to take steps toward eliminating the
investigated technology transfer-related acts, policies, and practices,
and in counteracting such policies. The Section 301 tariffs have also
been effective in reducing the exposure of U.S. persons and compa-
nies to China’s technology transfer-related acts, policies, and prac-
tices.” 63 Following the tariffs, China’s share of total U.S. imports
declined steadily, falling from 20 percent in 2017 to 13.1 percent
in the first eight months of 2024.† 64 Across sectors covered by Sec-
tion 301 tariffs, the USITC estimates that tariffs caused imports to
decline on average by 13 percent between 2018 and 2021.65 Oth-
er economies, including Mexico and Vietnam, are emerging as key
suppliers of intermediate and final goods for the U.S. economy. (For
more on the emerging signs of supply chain diversification from Chi-
na, see Chapter 1, “U.S.-China Economic and Trade Relations (Year
in Review).”)
   There are differing assessments on the employment and broader
economic impact of the tariffs. The USTR notes that the U.S. tar-
cent, while other products subject to the China Section 301 action kept a 25 percent duty. Chad
P. Bown, “U.S.-China Trade War Tariffs: An Up-to-Date Chart,” Peterson Institute for International
Economics, April 6, 2024.
   * In January 2024, Dr. Bown was sworn-in as the Chief Economist of the U.S. Department of
State.
   † Due to a lack of data collected on cross-border e-commerce imports from China that utilize the
de minimis exception, these figures likely underrepresent China’s actual share of the U.S. import
market. For more, see Chapter 4, “Unsafe and Unregulated Chinese Consumer Goods: Challenges
in Enforcing Import Regulations and Laws.”
                                               416

iffs and Chinese counter-tariffs “have had small negative effects on
U.S. aggregate economic welfare, positive impacts on U.S. production
in the 10 sectors most directly affected by the tariffs, and mini-
mal impacts on economy-wide prices and employment.” * 66 Though
the tariffs increased costs for some U.S. businesses and consumers,
when averaged across the entire U.S. economy, the effect was small †
and overwhelmed by inflationary pressures stemming from the
COVID-19 pandemic.67 The USITC estimated that the tariffs were
responsible for a 0.2 percent increase in the price of covered prod-
ucts produced domestically between 2018 and 2021, although prices
increased by as much as 15–25 percent in a select number of sectors,
including textiles, semiconductors, and motor vehicle parts.‡ 68 The
USITC’s modeling also found that the Section 301 tariffs caused
domestic production to expand by between 1.2 and 7.5 percent in
the ten sectors most directly affected by the tariffs.69 As Mr. Greer
highlighted in testimony before the Commission, total U.S. manu-
facturing employment grew by 500,000 workers between 2016 and
2019.70 Though this increase in employment occurred after years of
stagnant manufacturing jobs growth prior to the tariffs, there are
differing assessments on employment effect of the tariffs.71 For in-
stance, in the steel sector, the Economic Policy Institute highlights
how investments announced following the Section 232 steel action
in 2018 directly created 3,200 jobs.72 However, other estimates show
net job losses when accounting for employment in industries down-
stream from the steel sector. Economists Kadee Russ and Lydia Cox
calculate that the March 2018 tariffs on steel and aluminum led
to 75,000 fewer jobs in manufacturing by mid-2019.73 Nonetheless,
the United States added nearly 250,000 manufacturing jobs in 2018
and at the fastest growth rate since the 1980s.74 Various studies
find that the overall impact of the tariffs and China’s retaliatory
measures was mixed and may have had a small negative impact on
overall employment in 2018 and 2019, although total U.S. employ-
ment continued to grow during those years.75 If there was short-
term pain, in Mr. Greer’s assessment, it should be weighed against
the “cost of doing nothing or underestimating the threat posed by
China.” 76
Circumvention of U.S. Tariffs Likely Weakened Their
     Effectiveness
   The success of U.S trade policies against China was at least par-
tially undermined by Chinese exporting firms using various tac-
tics to circumvent or evade the increased tariffs. These measures
include: (1) transshipment or re-routing of products through third
countries to avoid China-specific duties, (2) fraudulently underval-
  * The USTR did not conduct its own economic analysis of the tariffs and instead synthesized
the results from numerous studies in academic literature as well as the findings from the USITC
report on the impact of the Section 301 tariffs on ten sectors. U.S. Trade Representative, Four-
Year Review of Actions Taken in the Section 301 Investigation: China’s Acts, Policies, and Practices
Related to Technology Transfer, Intellectual Property, and Innovation, May 2024, 64.
  † Imports from China amounted to 2.6 percent of GDP in 2018. U.S. Census Bureau, Trade
in Goods with China, September 9, 2024; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic
Analysis, Gross Domestic Product.
  ‡ The import data used in the USITC’s models do not account for shipments valued under
$800 that utilize the de minimis exception. Because low-value goods are more likely to utilize
the de minimis exception, their exclusion from USITC’s model could bias their price coefficients,
particularly in industries like textiles where cross-border e-commerce trade has grown rapidly.
                                              417

uing or mis-invoicing imports to U.S. customs to lower the assessed
duty, and (3) increased use of duty-free entry for small e-commerce
shipments under the de minimis exception. (For more on the in-
creased usage of these channels and the resulting problems for U.S.
customs and regulatory officials, see Chapter 4, “Unsafe and Un-
regulated Chinese Consumer Goods: Challenges in Enforcing Im-
port Regulations and Laws.”) The extent of tariff avoidance through
these tactics is unclear due to limited data and enforcement capac-
ity. However, in its four-year review of the Section 301 tariffs, the
USTR acknowledged the challenge posed by customs duty evasion.77
China also took other actions to mitigate some of the impact of trade
tensions on Chinese firms (see textbox below).

       China’s Efforts to Offset the Economic Impact of
                            Trade Actions
    China designed its retaliation against U.S. trade measures to
 maximize impact on the United States while minimizing harm to
 Chinese exporters. China’s retaliatory tariffs covered roughly 60
 percent of U.S. imports relative to 2017 levels, raising the average
 tariff on U.S. goods to 21.1 percent.78 A number of studies provide
 evidence that China strategically targeted U.S. products in what
 it viewed to be politically sensitive areas.* 79 China’s retaliato-
 ry action most notably included tariffs on nearly all U.S. agri-
 culture products, but China also raised duties on a broad range
 of U.S. intermediate inputs used by its manufacturing sector.80
 By 2020, Chinese retaliatory tariffs covered roughly 38 percent
 of U.S. manufactured goods imports, equivalent to $30 billion in
 2017 terms.81 However, China refrained from placing tariffs on
 aviation components and semiconductor products and equipment,
 suggesting it avoided raising tariffs on key products related to
 its own technological development priorities.82 Instead, China ap-
 peared to target products that had alternative suppliers to the
 United States, ensuring China-based firms could substitute out
 U.S. inputs impacted by China’s retaliatory measures.† China
 also reduced its most-favored-nation tariff across a range of prod-
 ucts from all other countries shortly after the start of the trade
 war, further incentivizing China-based firms to shift away from
 the United States.83 China’s average tariff on goods from other
 countries fell from 8 percent to 6.5 percent since 2018.‡ 84

  * There is some evidence that China’s retaliatory tariffs introduced in 2018 were correlated
with Republican candidates losing vote share in the 2018 House elections relative to the results
in 2016. However, the magnitude of this impact varies across different studies based on different
econometric modeling decisions. Emily J. Blanchard, Chad P. Bown, and Davin Chor, “Did Trump’s
Trade War Impact the 2018 Election?” Journal of International Economics 148 (2024): 1–23; Da-
vid Autor et al., “Help for the Heartland? The Employment and Electoral Effects of the Trump
Tariffs in the United States,” NBER Working Papers, January 2024.
  † Economists Davin Chor and Bingjing Li find that China’s imports of intermediate goods
picked up from the rest of the world in the first few months after China imposed retaliatory mea-
sures on the United States, suggesting that other economies filled in for tariffed U.S. products.
Davin Chor and Bingjing Li, “Illuminating the Effects of the U.S.-China Tariff War on China’s
Economy,” Journal of International Economics 150 (July 2024): Appendix 16.
  ‡ China’s most-favored nation cuts substantially overlapped with the list of U.S. products sub-
ject to Chinese retaliatory tariffs, suggesting these reductions aimed to further incentivize Chi-
nese firms to switch away from U.S. suppliers. Between January 2018 and June 2019, China
reduced the most-favored nation tariff for 4,646 product lines, nearly three-quarters of which
were covered by China’s retaliatory duties on the United States. Chad P. Bown, Euijin Jung, and
                                            418

       China’s Efforts to Offset the Economic Impact of
                    Trade Actions—Continued
    China implemented other measures to lessen the impact of the
 trade tensions on China’s economy. China’s government absorbed
 some of the cost of the U.S. tariffs by reducing taxes on domestic
 export manufacturers. China decreased the gross value-added tax
 (VAT) rate from 17 percent in 2018 to 13 percent by the end of
 2020 while also increasing the VAT rebate on exports over the
 same time period.85 The share of Chinese exports that faced an
 effective VAT rate of zero increased from 5 percent in 2017 to
 about 50 percent by the end of 2020.86 China also made it eas-
 ier for firms to access its processing trade regime, under which
 manufacturers approved by Chinese authorities can import in-
 puts duty free, provided they are used to produce exports.87 After
 2018, the share of U.S. imports that entered China as processing
 trade rose sharply, suggesting that firms made greater use of the
 customs arrangement to negate the impact of tariffs; notably, the
 processing trade share of imports from other countries remained
 largely unchanged.88 Nevertheless, the sum of China’s responses
 led to a diversion of imports away from the United States—by
 2023, the United States was the source for just 6.5 percent of
 China’s total imports, down from 7.3 percent before 2018.89

  The existing U.S. tariff architecture is not well-suited to deter the
import of products made in other countries using Chinese compo-
nents, creating an opportunity for Chinese exporters to continue
accessing the U.S. market by moving final assembly outside of Chi-
na. The Section 301 tariffs on China are designed to duty imports
directly from China-based producers. However, under the methodol-
ogy typically used to determine duty rates, the tariffs generally do
not apply to exporters based outside of China that utilize Chinese
components, provided that the inputs are modified in such a way to
meet the customs standard for the applicable rule of origin (often
requiring a “substantial transformation”).90 This creates a situation
where the United States may continue to import Chinese value-add-
ed content embedded via third-country supply chain linkages. A
number of recent studies note that trade data suggest producers in
third countries, such as Vietnam, relied at least in part on Chinese
inputs to ramp up their exports to the United States since 2018.91
Chinese EV makers are reportedly seeking to set up production in
Mexico, which could enable them to use Mexico-based operations
as a backdoor to import low-cost vehicles into the U.S. market and
avoid the 100 percent duties on Chinese EVs under Section 301.92
By statute, Section 301 duties apply only to the trading partner in
question and do not cover products produced in third countries.*
Eva (Yiwen) Zhang, “Trump Has Gotten China to Lower Its Tariffs. Just Toward Everyone Else,”
Peterson Institute for International Economics, June 12, 2019.
  * Other U.S. trade authorities enforced against China account for this dynamic. Section 201
duties are assessed on imports regardless of country of origin, while the Section 232 steel and
aluminum duties were assessed on other countries that processed unrefined products made in
China for the U.S. market. In the AD/CVD context, the U.S. Commerce Department can also
conduct scope and circumvention inquiries to determine and implement remedies if producers in
third countries rely on products subject to an AD/CVD order.
                                 419

Though Mr. Greer acknowledges that even incremental movements
of supply chains represent an improvement over the status quo, he
notes that third-country workarounds can be addressed by “extend-
ing the effect of the measures to imports from Chinese headquar-
tered companies or adjusting the rules of origin for goods subject to
the Section 301 tariffs.” 93 Tools to accomplish this include utilizing
rules of origin requirements in U.S. free trade agreements with oth-
er trading partners.
Challenges in Aligning Tariff Measures with Strategic
     Objectives
   The findings of the China Section 301 investigation into China’s
technology transfer practices have been used to justify tariffs on a
range of products that extend well beyond the original scope of the
investigation, leading some to assess that the trade measures lack
strategic clarity. Mr. Greer testified before the Commission that the
China Section 301 tariffs were designed to target products relat-
ed to the Made in China 2025 strategy, a national industry policy
strategy released in 2015 to promote ten high-tech industries.94 An
analysis by Mary Lovely and Yang Liang at the Peterson Institute
of International Economics compared the products included in the
initial Section 301 tariff action—which was implemented on July 6,
2018, and covered $34 billion in Chinese imports—to a list of sectors
identified by the Commerce Department as patent-intensive.95 They
found that 80 percent of the products in the initial tariff action fell
within these industries, consistent with the technologies the USTR
identified as subject to extensive Chinese technology transfer prac-
tices in its Section 301 investigation.96 However, subsequent tariff
waves were scoped much more broadly. According to Dr. Lovely, these
Section 301 actions placed greater focus on less knowledge-intensive
and more labor-intensive sectors.97 Because of the expansive scope
of the measures, she assessed in testimony before the Commission
that “U.S. trade policy objectives have not been clearly linked to the
trade policy instruments we currently deploy.” 98 Some argue that
such a broad approach is necessary to respond to the pervasiveness
of China’s non-market practices, while others advocate for focusing
U.S. trade restrictions on a set of products with national security
implications and removing barriers to trade with China in less stra-
tegically important areas.99 Following the USTR’s 2024 Section 301
review, the U.S. government maintained and selectively reviewed
the existing broad-ranging tariff measures, and it also selectively
expanded the tariff measures to industries where surging Chinese
manufacturing capacity posed a clear threat to ongoing efforts to
bolster U.S. domestic production.100
   The China Section 301 tariffs impacted foreign firms in China and
raised production costs for U.S.-based firms with Chinese supply
chains, reflecting the challenge of targeting tariffs solely at Chinese
producers that benefit from state support. In their review of the
Section 301 tariff list, Dr. Lovely and Dr. Liang found that products
targeted for tariffs were primarily sourced from foreign affiliates
operating in China, with the exception of tariffs on China’s chemical
sector (see textbox on “Chinese Supply Chains Are Reducing Depen-
dence on Foreign-Invested Enterprises (FIEs)”).101 In the aggregate,
                                              420

total U.S. trade with China only amounted to 3.2 percent of U.S.
gross domestic product (GDP) in 2018, meaning most U.S. economic
activity had limited reliance on China.* 102 The Section 301 tariffs
did increase production costs for U.S. firms using China as an ex-
port production platform or using intermediate inputs from China.
Costs for U.S.-based producers that relied on supply chains linked to
China also rose. By 2020, 93 percent of Chinese intermediate goods
imports were subject to higher duties, compared to 69 percent of
consumer goods and 47 percent of capital equipment.103 One study
found that for U.S. exporting firms with supply chain links to China,
the tariffs on imported inputs effectively acted as a 2 percent tariff
on their exports.† 104 The USTR engaged in an exclusion review pro-
cess to mitigate these effects. In addition, an increased number of
U.S.-based exporters applied to operate within a U.S. foreign trade
zone (FTZ), which provides lower tariffs for imported inputs incorpo-
rated into exported products. The share of U.S. merchandise imports
from China entering under special duty provisions for warehousing
or an FTZ increased from 11 percent in 2017 to 17 percent in 2023,
with a total of $75 billion in inputs entering these zones.‡ 105

    Chinese Supply Chains Are Reducing Dependence on
              Foreign-Invested Enterprises (FIEs)
    Foreign (non-Chinese) firms in China have historically been an
 important source of China’s exports. Recently, however, domestic
 Chinese firms have overtaken them as China’s leading exporters.
 In 2014, foreign-invested enterprises (FIEs)—which include sub-
 sidiaries of multinational enterprises, Sino-foreign joint ventures,
 and Hong Kong and Macau-funded enterprises—accounted for 46
 percent of China’s total exports.106 In 2014, 60 percent of China’s
 U.S.-bound exports originated from FIEs, reflecting the higher re-
 liance on China as a hub for offshore production within U.S. sup-
 ply chains.107 Though more recent data on China’s exports to the
 United States by FIEs are unavailable,§ FIEs’ share of China’s

  * Though China is the largest supplier of imported inputs for manufacturing, most of the goods
used in U.S. manufacturing are sourced domestically. One study estimates that the average U.S.
manufacturing sector sources 88 percent of manufactured inputs by value added from within
the United States. Richard Baldwin, Rebecca Freeman, and Angelos Theodorakopoulos, “Hidden
Exposure: Measuring U.S. Supply Chain Reliance,” Brookings, September 27, 2023, 16.
  † In some cases, U.S. manufacturers face a tariff inversion, where tariffs on inputs used in man-
ufacturing exceed the value of the finished good, disadvantaging domestic production compared to
imports. For example, the CEO of the U.S.-based television producer Element asserts that it faces
an inverted tariff due to U.S. duties on LCD panels from China, and it is challenged to compete
on price with televisions assembled in Mexico or other countries and imported into the United
States. David Baer, written testimony for U.S. Senate Finance Committee, Hearing on U.S.-China
Relations: Improving U.S. Competitiveness Through Trade, April 22, 2021, 10.
  ‡ In contrast, the share of U.S. imports from all other countries that entered a warehouse or
FTZ fell from 10 percent in 2017 to 7 percent in 2023. U.S. Census Bureau, USA Trade Online,
September 9, 2024.
  § China only publishes data on total exports by FIEs and does not release data that show ex-
ports by destination. The 2014 estimate on exports by FIEs to the United States was calculated
using microdata from China’s customs agency. Commission staff were unable to locate updated
calculations based on these data. U.S. trade data on imports from related parties, where the
importer has some form of a corporate relationship with the China-based exporter, suggest the
role of FIEs in China’s U.S.-bound exports followed the trend in its overall exports, though the
related party data only captures a portion of all FIE transactions given its focus on U.S.-based
multinational enterprises and exporters and importers frequently leaving this data field empty
on customs forms. U.S. imports from related parties in China fell from 29 percent in 2014 to 20
percent in 2023. U.S. Census Bureau, Imports and Exports by Related Parties, July 3, 2024; Mary
Lovely and Yang Liang, “Trump Tariffs Primarily Hit Multinational Supply Chains, Harm U.S.
Technology Competitiveness,” Peterson Institute for International Economics, May 2018, 2.
                                               421

    Chinese Supply Chains Are Reducing Dependence on
       Foreign-Invested Enterprises (FIEs)—Continued
 total exports have fallen over the past decade. Between 2014 and
 2023, FIEs’ share of China’s overall exports fell from 46 percent
 to 28 percent.108 This decline was likely even sharper within ad-
 vanced technology products; FIEs’ share of exports of “high-tech
 new products”—a category defined by China’s National Bureau
 of Statistics—dropped from 84 percent in 2011 to 59 percent in
 2020.* 109 Though foreign multinationals and global supply chains
 continue to play a significant role in China’s exporting sector,
 particularly for advanced technology products, domestic Chinese
 firms are driving a growing share of China’s export activity.

Export Controls
   China asserts itself as a significant military power, and export
controls have emerged as the United States’ policy tool of choice for
denying China access to critical dual-use technologies and hindering
China’s capacity to develop such technologies on its own. Adding
to the complexity of crafting export control policy toward China is
the country’s military-civil fusion policy, which blurs the distinction
between Chinese commercial enterprise and China’s military. With
mounting concerns over China’s military modernization, growing ag-
gressiveness in the South China Sea, and posture toward Taiwan,
the question of how to restrict sensitive technologies that could give
China a military edge has taken on added urgency in recent years.†
   China has capitalized on years of broad and mostly unfettered
access to U.S. and allied foundational technologies by making sig-
nificant leaps in its domestic capabilities. As U.S. policymakers have
shifted their assessment of the threat from China and recognized
the growing importance of certain types of technologies like ad-
vanced semiconductors, export controls have taken on new signifi-
cance for their potential ability to help the United States maintain
its technological and military edge. The evolution in export control
policies faces added challenges of carefully identifying controlled
technologies, a fast-moving technological landscape, and fragmented
supply chains. New export controls must contend with questions on
scope, enforcement, and structure to optimize their effect.
   At the same time, in the Export Control Reform Act, Congress re-
quired export controls to be evaluated on an ongoing basis to ensure
they do not inadvertently harm U.S. technological leadership, which
“requires that United States persons are competitive in global mar-
kets.” 110 Congress has further stated as export control policy that
“[e]xport controls applied unilaterally to items widely available from
foreign sources generally are less effective in preventing end-users
  * Chinese statistics distinguish the high-tech exports from firms invested by Hong Kong, Ma-
cau, and Taiwan entities from those of all other foreign-invested firms. The latter groups’ share
of China’s high-tech exports fell from 70.5 percent in 2011 to 25 percent in 2020. Scott Kennedy,
“The Private Sector Drives Growth in China’s High-Tech Exports,” Center for Strategic and In-
ternational Studies, April 28, 2022.
  † This discussion omits the essential issue of export controls for human rights reasons, as in the
case of foreign governments using technology to surveil activity, restrict movement, and otherwise
control or limit the rights of their citizens.
                                             422

from acquiring those items. Application of unilateral export controls
should be limited for purposes of protecting specific United States
national security and foreign policy interests.” 111 To underscore the
importance of this statement of policy, Congress requires the secre-
tary of commerce to report annually on the impact of export controls
on U.S. scientific and technological leadership.112
Changing Design of Export Controls
  The United States’ approach to export controls has evolved as the
country’s traditional commitments to the principles of open trade
have collided with the realities of adversarial nations seeking to
use U.S. technology to further their military aims. The Export Con-
trol Reform Act (ECRA) of 2018, motivated by increasing concerns
regarding the dual-use technology trade between the United States
and China, forms the foundation of the current U.S. export control
regime toward China.113 ECRA gives expansive authority to the
president to control the export, reexport, and transfer of items by
U.S. or foreign nationals and corporations. It also provides “U.S. per-
sons” authority to limit the ability of U.S. individuals and companies
to provide support for certain foreign military-focused activities.114
Unlike prior export control statutes, ECRA explicitly regards eco-
nomic security as a component of national security and has no ex-
piration date.* 115

              U.S. Export Control Infrastructure
    The Export Administration Regulations (EAR) implement
 U.S. export control policy for goods and destinations, the license
 applications process used by exporters, and the Commerce
 Control List.† 116 Much of the EAR’s infrastructure predates
 ECRA, though ECRA expanded and implemented notable re-
 forms within the EAR.‡ 117 ECRA created the statutory author-
 ity for the Entity List, a list of foreign persons and end uses
 that are determined to be a threat to U.S. national security.
 Exports to persons on the Entity List broadly require licensing
 for all items subject to the EAR. Most persons on the list face
 a presumption of denial for licenses.118 In recent years, the
 Entity List has been increasingly used to target key Chinese
 firms with direct ties to the People’s Liberation Army, such as
 semiconductor manufacturer SMIC.§ 119

   * The act also mandates a review of export license requirements. The review strengthens the
licensing process for countries subject to a comprehensive U.S. arms embargo, like China, and
mandates as part of the licensing process an assessment of the impact of granting a license on
the U.S. defense industrial base.
   † The Commerce Control List is a list of dual-use technologies subject to controls under the
EAR. The Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) within the Department of Commerce adminis-
ters the EAR. Paul K. Kerr and Christopher A. Casey, “The U.S. Export Control System and the
Export Control Reform Act of 2018,” Congressional Research Service CRS R 46814, June 7, 2021.
   ‡ Separate regulations control nuclear materials and technology and defense articles and ser-
vices. U.S. law has expanded to prohibit arms sales to China since 1989. The United States also
maintains a policy of denial for exports of satellite and space equipment to China. Karen M. Sut-
ter and Christopher A. Casey, “U.S. Export Controls and China,” Congressional Research Service
CRS IF 11627, March 24, 2022.
   § While the Entity List is the primary list containing parties of concern, BIS also maintains
a Denied Persons List, which contains entities that are fully denied export privileges, and an
Unverified List, which contains entities that cannot receive license exceptions and require addi-
tional scrutiny. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, Denied Persons
List, 2024; U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, Unverified List, 2024.
                                             423

          U.S. Export Control Infrastructure—Continued
    The EAR also regulates the transfer of controlled technologies
 to a foreign person within the United States, often called “deemed
 exports,” by requiring a license. Such licenses are typically used
 by universities, advanced technology research and development
 institutions, biochemical firms, and the medical and advanced
 computing sectors, which often rely on highly trained foreign
 persons to support their research and development (R&D) activi-
 ties.120 Some concerns have been raised that China is seeking to
 take advantage of the United States’ open research environments
 to circumvent export controls, heightening the importance of the
 deemed export rules.121
    A powerful but—until recently—rarely used tool is the Foreign
 Direct Product Rule (FDPR), which regulates the reexport and
 transfer of any foreign-made items if their production directly in-
 volves certain technology, software, or equipment that originates
 from the United States, even if the item was produced outside
 of the United States by a foreign entity.122 The Commerce De-
 partment has recently utilized the FDPR in conjunction with the
 Entity List to limit the ability of targeted entities to sidestep
 U.S. controls by sourcing restricted products from companies out-
 side the United States. For example, the department used the
 rule against China in 2020 to help improve and expand the ef-
 fectiveness of controls targeting Huawei.* Specifically, Commerce
 used the FDPR to expand controls that restricted direct exports
 of U.S. semiconductors by also controlling exports to Huawei of
 products made with U.S. technology (even products made whol-
 ly outside the United States by foreign firms) that support the
 manufacture of semiconductors.123 (For more on Huawei, see “Ef-
 fects of Export Controls” later in this chapter.) In mid-2024, the
 Department of Commerce announced an expansion of the FDPR
 rules, albeit with exclusions for key semiconductor manufactur-
 ing equipment-producing countries like Japan, the Netherlands,
 and South Korea, by (1) prohibiting exports to more Chinese end
 users and (2) lowering the percentage of U.S. content required to
 trigger the rule.† 124
    ECRA tasked the Administration with creating an interagen-
 cy process to define and place controls on emerging and foun-
 dational technologies.‡ However, the Commission’s 2023 Annual

  * Before the FDPR was updated, Huawei was able to maintain access to the supply of advanced
foreign chips because it could still purchase chips produced by non-U.S. firms made using U.S.
technology (e.g., semiconductor manufacturing equipment). Given the widespread prevalence of
U.S. technology at some level in most steps of the semiconductor design and manufacturing pro-
cess, the expanded FDPR rule significantly expanded the practical scope of the controls. Gregory
C. Allen, “In Chip Race, China Gives Huawei the Steering Wheel: Huawei’s New Smartphone and
the Future of Semiconductor Export Controls,” Center for Strategic and International Studies,
October 6, 2023.
  † In September 2024, the U.S. Department of Commerce expanded export controls on semicon-
ductors, quantum computing items, and other technologies. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau
of Industry and Security, “Commerce Control List Additions and Revisions; Implementation of
Controls on Advanced Technologies Consistent with Controls Implemented by International Part-
ners,” Federal Register 89:72926 (September 6, 2024).
  ‡ This is generally understood to cover the White House’s Critical and Emerging Technologies
List: advanced computing, advanced engineering materials, advanced gas turbine engine tech-
nologies, advanced manufacturing, advanced and networked sensing and signature management,
advanced nuclear energy technologies, AI, autonomous systems and robotics, biotechnologies,
                                            424

          U.S. Export Control Infrastructure—Continued
 Report identified that “despite increasing the number of specif-
 ically named Chinese entities barred from receiving technology,
 the Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security
 (BIS) has made limited progress in expanding the scope of tech-
 nologies controlled. In 2018, ECRA tasked the agency with iden-
 tifying ‘emerging and foundational’ technologies and imposing
 controls where necessary, but BIS has not identified any founda-
 tional technologies.” 125 In a May 2022 statement, BIS announced
 it would no longer attempt to distinguish between emerging and
 foundational technologies.126 Instead, BIS would refer to such
 technologies as Section 1758 technologies since there were defi-
 nitional challenges to distinguishing between the two and there
 were few practical implications of the distinction, noting that “the
 categorization of the technologies has sometimes delayed the im-
 position of controls.” 127 In his written testimony to the Commis-
 sion, partner at the law firm Akin and a former Assistant Secre-
 tary of Commerce for Export Administration in BIS Kevin Wolf
 stated that “BIS has published the first unilateral controls on
 [emerging and foundational technologies] with its October 2022
 [semiconductor-related] rule described above, which clearly meets
 the spirit and purpose of Section 1758, although not the letter of
 the section.” 128

   Controls on advanced semiconductors reflect a realization that
because certain technologies are so foundational to advanced mili-
tary capabilities, they need to be controlled more broadly than pre-
viously envisioned for dual-use technologies. In testimony before
the Commission, nonresident fellow at the Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace Peter Harrell commended the October 2022
semiconductor controls. He argued that they leveraged chokepoints
effectively, delineated clear objectives, and were devised to reduce
diversions and workarounds, reflecting lessons learned from previ-
ous controls targeting specific Chinese firms.129 BIS export controls
on semiconductors expanded in 2022 from an approach that covered
a small number of companies in China to broader country-based
controls on both semiconductors and semiconductor manufacturing
equipment. BIS expanded semiconductor controls again in October
2023 to cover additional types of semiconductors and semiconductor
manufacturing equipment. Mr. Harrell sees the flexibility and iter-
ative approach shown by BIS as strengths that allow the United
States to “address gaps and workarounds as they are identified” and
“reduce the odds of unintended consequences.” 130 A similar iterative
process could be used to expand controls as future emerging tech-
nologies take on stronger national security implications, including
quantum information science, AI (to the extent not covered by ex-
isting controls on advanced semiconductors needed for AI systems),
communication and networking technologies, directed energy, financial technologies, human-ma-
chine interfaces, hypersonics, networked sensors and sensing, quantum information technologies,
renewable energy generation and storage, semiconductors and microelectronics, and space tech-
nologies and systems. John P. Barker et al., “White House Releases Updated Critical and Emerg-
ing Technologies List,” Arnold & Porter, February 28, 2024.
                                 425

robotics, and biotechnology. (For more on U.S.-China technology com-
petition in these sectors, see Chapter 3, “U.S.-China Competition in
Emerging Technologies.”)
  While recent attention has focused on advanced technology prod-
ucts, particularly the most advanced semiconductors and semicon-
ductor manufacturing equipment, some experts have recommended
that the United States review more traditional dual-use technolo-
gies to identify whether other sensitive chokepoints exist that could
hinder China’s ability to develop or advance its own dual-use in-
dustries—for example, civilian aerospace. China’s leadership has
repeatedly expressed anxiety about its reliance on certain high-end
electronic components and specialized steel alloys that are manufac-
tured by a small number of U.S. or allied companies; these inputs
currently have no viable high-end Chinese competitors and will like-
ly take years or more to duplicate.131
Plurilateral vs. Unilateral Export Controls
   Due to the interconnected nature of the global trade ecosystem
and the lack of tangible methods to track or control the final des-
tinations of physical goods, the effectiveness and sustainability of
export controls relies on the cooperation of allies and partners. The
United States has traditionally preferred to take a multilateral ap-
proach to export controls for three reasons.132 First, this approach
ensures maximum effectiveness of controls since the controls block
trade from a broader range of potential sources of the technology for
the targeted country or entity.133 Second, a multilateral approach
improves enforcement; absent geolocation solutions that could re-
motely shut off technology if it travels outside of a proscribed area,
preventing reexport of restricted goods relies on allied cooperation,
tracking, and enforcement systems.134 Third, broad adherence to a
uniform set of controls ensures that firms in other countries do not
merely “backfill” U.S. exports, which would both limit the effective-
ness of the controls and potentially harm U.S. interests by redirect-
ing revenue needed to sustain R&D away from U.S. firms to their
international competitors.135 In the long run, unilateral controls can
create a structural regulatory and economic incentive for U.S. com-
panies and their foreign competitors to develop technologies outside
the United States with non-U.S. technology and content. This would
undercut the U.S. export control goal of maintaining the country’s
technological leadership.
   Experience, however, indicates that U.S. leadership on export con-
trols via unilateral implementation can convince allied countries to
follow. Allied countries contend with their own domestic interests
that are concerned about losing access to profitable markets. When
the United States implements export controls ahead of allied coun-
tries, this can help allied governments overcome domestic political
constraints.136 Plurilateral controls also face constraints based on
the varying legal powers of foreign governments and the resources
available to devote to enforcement and ongoing international coop-
eration.137
   The October 2022 controls on advanced semiconductor and semi-
conductor manufacturing equipment exports to China provide an
example.138 While U.S. companies design some of the most sophis-
                                              426

ticated semiconductors and are among the leaders in semiconduc-
tor manufacturing equipment, companies in Europe and East Asia
also play critical roles in the production of the chips themselves and
certain high-end chip-making equipment.139 Initially, the October
2022 rules were imposed unilaterally by the United States, though
they did expand restrictions and licensing requirements on some
foreign-produced items.140 Aware of the need to multilateralize the
rules for effectiveness, the United States designed the rules in con-
sultation with key allies and worked to bring them along. Japan
and the Netherlands, home to a number of companies key to ad-
vanced semiconductor production, have since imposed similar con-
trols based on the U.S. rollout.141 By moving first, the United States
was able to quickly target China’s ability to purchase key semicon-
ductor manufacturing equipment supplied by the United States,
which could have enabled more advanced domestic semiconductor
manufacturing capability.142 With the United States having demon-
strated commitment to sacrificing some short-term economic gain
for longer-term security, the Netherlands and Japan also agreed to
limit their own exports of advanced equipment to China and to ab-
stain from developing products that would have otherwise filled the
gap left by U.S. firms.143 In April 2024, Japan expanded its export
controls to include additional types of semiconductor manufacturing
equipment, following the United States’ lead in its October 2023
expansion of its semiconductor controls.144
   Still, most other countries have not imposed export controls to the
same extent as the United States. Many countries currently lack a
legal regime that allows them to target controls to specific entities of
concern versus broader country-targeted controls, which have been
the traditional approach of multilateral regimes. Other countries
have also been hesitant to adopt analogues to the “U.S. persons”
controls, which limit the ability of U.S. individuals and companies
to support Chinese semiconductor development and ongoing servic-
ing of certain equipment. While Japan’s enhanced export controls
on semiconductor equipment apply to all exports, not just China’s,
and Japan does implement catch-all end user restrictions related to
the exports of certain technologies, it does not prohibit non-resident
Japanese persons from servicing existing semiconductor machinery.
The United States has pressed both Japan and the Netherlands
to implement restrictions on ongoing maintenance and servicing
of chip-making equipment already in China, without which their
ongoing ability to produce cutting-edge chips would deteriorate.145
This concern is significant given the capabilities and large amount
of semiconductor manufacturing equipment China procured both be-
fore the controls were announced and between the announcement
and when it went into effect.146
   Traditional multilateral frameworks for export controls, set up
to control conventional and nuclear weapons, have not adapted
well to modern challenges of dual-use technologies and changes in
geopolitical realities.* The four existing multilateral export con-
trol regimes are informal arrangements whereby member coun-
tries can coordinate policies and exchange information and best
  * See Appendix I, “Current Multilateral Export Control Regimes” for a list of the current export
control regimes.
                                 427

practices for various types of weapons-related products and tech-
nologies.147 Each regime is consensus-based and does not have
legally binding rules. Some regimes have only limited self-report-
ing on adherence. Additionally, a drawback of consensus-based
regimes is that a single state can veto important decisions like
admitting new members or updating the control lists. Since 2021,
Russia has effectively neutralized new decisions under the Was-
senaar Arrangement, which serves to control dual-use items in
addition to conventional arms.148
   Bilateral and mini-lateral coordination could provide one solution,
particularly for technologies with only a few commercial producers.
Negotiations and controls could move faster, be nimbler, and poten-
tially involve higher levels of coordination by having fewer coun-
tries involved.149 As the United States has conferred with nations
in smaller settings, a new consensus has emerged on the need to
control items such as semiconductors. The informal cooperation be-
tween the United States, Japan, and the Netherlands with respect
to semiconductor and semiconductor manufacturing equipment
controls provides an example of the benefits of and possibilities for
mini-lateral approaches. In a statement after a trilateral meeting
with representatives from Japan and South Korea, the Department
of Commerce affirmed the national security significance of semicon-
ductors and referenced the role of the trilateral U.S.-Japan-Repub-
lic of Korea Disruptive Technology Protection Network, launched
in April 2024, in combating illicit technology transfer.150 Another
example is the Trilateral Security Partnership between the United
States, the United Kingdom, and Australia (AUKUS). In June 2023,
the United States announced formal collaboration with its AUKUS
partners—the UK and Australia—on export control enforcement,
which would involve knowledge sharing and other cooperation.151
This effort has helped spur AUKUS countries to align their relevant
lists of controlled equipment and technology and permit exceptions
where needed to ensure that trade in these goods between the three
countries faces fewer restrictions.152 Even with a small number of
countries, challenges can emerge when export control policy is not
aligned or allied governments lack the legal authority to impose the
types of controls used by the United States. Progress in AUKUS
has reportedly been slowed by the gap between the United States’
controls and those of the UK and Australia.153

     Export Control Outcomes at the U.S.-EU Trade and
                       Technology Council
   The U.S.-EU Trade and Technology Council (TTC) has helped
 advance transatlantic communication on export controls in some
 aspects, such as evasion and diversion efforts in exports to Rus-
 sia and Iran, but significant challenges remain in coordinating
 controls on sensitive technology flows to China. In June 2021,
 the United States and the EU established the TTC in an effort
 to deepen ties and coordination on approaches to trade, technolo-
 gy, and security.154 The TTC hosts ten working groups, including
 groups on export control cooperation and investment screening
                                              428

     Export Control Outcomes at the U.S.-EU Trade and
                Technology Council—Continued
 cooperation.* Although China is not explicitly mentioned in the
 TTC’s outlined mission, addressing China’s increasing influence
 is a point of focus for the TTC. Toward that end, the TTC has
 produced tangible policy developments, including plans to oper-
 ationalize a joint early warning mechanism for disruptions in
 semiconductor supply chains and the development of a joint AI
 Roadmap.155 The United States and EU have also set up a plat-
 form to share information, including about export control licens-
 es.156
   In addition to EU-level efforts on a broad set of issues, indi-
 vidual European countries have also partnered with the Unit-
 ed States to confront China’s growing challenge. For example,
 in March 2023, the Netherlands joined the United States in re-
 stricting exports of semiconductor manufacturing technology to
 China.157
   However, despite a broad commitment to “promote convergent
 control approaches on sensitive dual-use technologies,” the TTC
 has not resulted in concrete goals or timelines for fundamentally
 reforming the multilateral export control system or creating a
 unified approach to export controls on China. In fact, it remains
 unclear if the TTC can be leveraged in this way.158 Particularly,
 there is no EU level uniform export control policy, and EU mem-
 ber states retain autonomy over matters of national security and
 investment.159

Bringing Allies and Partners on Board
   As Mr. Wolf testified, broad plurilateral controls will only be
agreed to if allies believe the controls are in their national securi-
ty interests, which requires outreach and engagement on the part
of the United States. In testimony before the Commission in May
2024, regional experts on industry and trade policies argued that
many allies and partners in the Asia Pacific, Latin America and the
Caribbean, and Europe still do not understand or agree with the na-
tional security justification for U.S. controls.160 To the extent allies
believe export controls are about giving the United States an eco-
nomic advantage rather than addressing national security concerns,
they are less likely to implement parallel domestic export controls.
In written testimony for the Commission, Mr. Wolf articulated his
view that “if ever the justification for a new control is solely to help
U.S. industry succeed economically, it will always eventually result
in precisely the opposite outcome because no ally is going to agree
to a plurilateral control just to help U.S. industry.” 161 Furthermore,
based on dialogues with foreign governments, think tanks, indus-
try, and media, Mr. Wolf believes many countries outside the United
  * Working groups include: tech standards, climate and green tech, secure supply chains, infor-
mation and communications technology and services (ICTS) security and competitiveness, data
governance and tech platform regulation, misuse of technology threatening security and human
rights, export controls, investment screening, promoting small and medium-sized enterprises ac-
cess to and use of digital technologies, and global trade challenges. Office of the U.S. Trade Rep-
resentative, U.S.-E.U. Trade and Technology Council (TTC).
                                             429

States take the view that only items with a “direct and immediately
identifiable relationship to the development, production, or use of a
weapon” should be subject to export controls.162
  Outreach to help countries better understand burgeoning national
security threats has proven effective. The United States used exten-
sive outreach efforts to expose the security threat of Chinese compo-
nents in global telecommunications networks. Former U.S. Undersec-
retary of State for Economic Growth, Energy, and the Environment
Keith Krach led a team working with allied countries’ governments
and telecom corporations to reduce the presence of equipment man-
ufactured by Chinese firm Huawei in telecom infrastructure.163 In
addition to helping other nations understand the national security
justifications for new controls on Huawei equipment, U.S. efforts at
coordination with allies and like-minded countries also helped over-
come fears of Chinese retaliation; by being a part of a wider group,
each country had a buffer against Chinese pressure.164
Effects of Export Controls
   U.S. and allied export controls have slowed China’s technologi-
cal advancement and made it more difficult for Russia to procure
components for weapons systems. Maintaining and improving the
effectiveness of export controls has required cooperation with allies,
continuous adjustments and additions to the export control regime,
and coordination with other economic tools like sanctions. However,
experts continue to raise concerns over how long these initial suc-
cesses will last as China focuses its efforts on becoming a self-suffi-
cient manufacturer of legacy and high-end chips.
   Enforcement in the United States and other countries has encoun-
tered a number of difficulties. Chinese firms stockpiled equipment
from key Dutch and Japanese firms in the period between when
export controls were announced and when they went into effect.165
Even after the effective date of the controls, China continues to be a
major buyer of lower-end semiconductor manufacturing equipment
not subject to current controls. ASML’s equipment sales to China
surged in 2024.166 Industry experts have claimed that South Ko-
rean * and Japanese † firms also continue to sell machines, compo-
nents, spare parts, and materials to Chinese firms that U.S. firms
would not be able to sell due to U.S. restrictions.167 Chinese firms
have also demonstrated the ability to use new or renamed shell
companies to avoid enforcement.168
   China has intensified efforts to design out foreign components in
its chip-making processes. To build out domestic supply chains, the
Chinese government provides financial support to subsidize Chinese
chip companies using domestic technology and materials as much as
possible in their production processes.169 Huawei itself plays a key
role in nurturing China’s semiconductor ecosystem.170 Since being
  * South Korea is one of China’s largest trading partners for memory chips, silicon wafers, and
chip-making materials and parts. In September 2024, South Korea’s Trade Minister indicated
they would seek additional incentives from the United States in exchange for further tightening
advanced semiconductor export controls. Sam Kim, “Embracing China Chip Curbs,” Bloomberg,
September 2, 2024; MacKenzie Hawkins and Sam Kim, “US Asks South Korea to Toughen Export
Curbs on China Chips,” Bloomberg, April 3, 2024.
  † China comprises a large and growing share of revenue for major Japanese semiconductor
manufacturing equipment companies. Anniek Bao, “Japanese Chip Equipment Firms Count on
China Sales Amid U.S. Moves to Block High-End Exports to Beijing,” CNN, September 6, 2024.
                                             430

added to the Entity List and targeted with the FDPR, Huawei has
doubled down on developing access to domestic alternatives for ad-
vanced chips. Huawei has benefitted from direct subsidies and pref-
erential contracts with the Chinese government.171 These subsidies,
along with Huawei’s still flourishing telecommunications business,
gave it the financial resources to weather the initial drop in reve-
nue from lost smartphone sales and continue investing in R&D.172
In 2022, Huawei filed patents for proprietary ultraviolet technology,
indicating that it was trying to reduce reliance on imported ASML
equipment.173 At the same time, China has focused on increasing
production capacity for legacy chips, which provide much of the com-
puting power needed to modernize China’s military and are critical
for a wide range of supply chains.174
   Examination of Chinese domestic chip manufacturers and smart-
phone makers indicates that China’s efforts to reduce its reliance
on imported semiconductors and chip manufacturing equipment
have been slowed by export controls. Although Huawei’s smartphone
business showed signs of recovery four years after the Department
of Commerce tightened export controls, it is clear that China’s
technology still lags behind the leading global chip producers.175
In 2023, Huawei released a new smartphone powered by high-end
Chinese-made chips,* but these chips trailed the world’s most ad-
vanced chips in size, energy efficiency, and cost.176 Huawei’s smart-
phones demonstrated increased self-sufficiency in the percentage of
Chinese components in new models released in 2024, but the pace
of advancement in semiconductor technology appeared to slow.177
Huawei reportedly will soon release a new AI chip to replace U.S.
chips blocked from export to China by export controls.178 Equipment
stockpiles helped but likely did not solve constraints in fabrication
capacity, and China remains dependent on foreign lithography
equipment.179
   Coordination between the United States and Europe has played a
key role in the effectiveness of export controls on Russia.180 Export
controls and sanctions have been used in concert to increase their
effectiveness in safeguarding national security, particularly when
export controls alone are not enough to deter aggressive action by
an adversary. In late 2021 and early 2022, the G7 sought to use the
threat of sanctions and export controls to deter Russia from attack-
ing Ukraine.181 While this effort was ultimately unsuccessful, the
imposition of export controls after Putin’s invasion of Ukraine, cou-
pled with sanctions that limited the country’s access to financial re-
sources, have degraded Russia’s military industrial base by forcing
it to pivot away from Western technology.182 After the G7 imposed
export controls on Russia, Russia shifted to China and other coun-
tries, such as Turkey and Iran, to procure replacement goods.183
   However, Chinese firms are playing a role in helping Russia evade
export controls and procure controlled inputs for weapons systems
used against Ukraine. A battlefield report on export controls found
that of 2,800 different non-Russian components that experts recov-
ered from Russian weapons in Ukraine, almost all of the compo-
  * The chips were manufactured by China’s leading semiconductor equipment manufacturer,
Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corporation (SMIC). Gregory C. Allen, “In Chip
Race, China Gives Huawei the Steering Wheel: Huawei’s New Smartphone and the Future of
Semiconductor Export Controls,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, October 6, 2023.
                                               431

nents—95 percent—originated from Western firms.184 To address
the flow of dual-use goods from these countries to Russia, in De-
cember 2023 the Administration issued an EO authorizing sanc-
tions against third country banks that facilitate the sale of dual-use
goods to Russia.185 At the same time, continued transshipment from
China and Hong Kong in particular has eroded these export con-
trols and allowed controlled materials to end up on the battlefield.
(For more on China’s support for Russia’s war effort, see Chapter
2, “U.S.-China Security and Foreign Affairs (Year in Review).” For
more on Hong Kong’s role in export control evasion, see Chapter 10,
“Hong Kong.”) Russia has also been attempting to grow its domestic
production capacity for military and dual-use goods, often with Chi-
nese technical support.186
Investment Screening
   Like trade, investment flows between the United States and Chi-
na have become inextricably linked with national security concerns.
Cross-border investment can be broken into two categories: direct
investment and portfolio investment. Portfolio investment covers
transactions involving equity or debt securities of an enterprise but
typically does not translate into direct management oversight or in-
put into the business beyond shareholder voting rights. In contrast,
direct investment typically involves transactions that provide own-
ership of 10 percent or more, establishing a lasting interest in and
a significant degree of influence over an enterprise.
   Chinese investment into the United States has the potential to
be a conduit for technology transfer and can provide China with
leverage over key sectors of the U.S. economy.187 Yet from the other
direction, U.S. investment into China can provide needed funding
and transfer intangible benefits—such as managerial expertise and
broader awareness and sophistication about technology markets and
business models—to advanced technology companies, which in turn
have the potential to enhance Chinese military capabilities.188 To
ensure that cross-border investments do not imperil national secu-
rity, the United States has expanded its inbound investment screen-
ing regime to further scrutinize Chinese direct investment into the
United States. It is now also pursuing the creation of an outbound
investment screening regime that may look at both direct and port-
folio investment.
Inbound Investment Screening
   Chinese inbound direct investment in the United States has de-
clined substantially since 2017.* U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) data show that new Chinese foreign direct investment (FDI)
peaked in 2016 at $27.4 billion before plummeting 97.7 percent to
$621 million in 2023.† 189 As of 2023, Chinese entities held $62.4
   * Unless otherwise noted, assume any data on investment stock or flows involving China in-
clude investment originating from or directed to Hong Kong and Macau.
   † This trend matches alternative data sources such as those compiled by Rhodium Group, an
independent research provider, though they capture a higher overall value for investment and
find that annual investment has dropped from $46 billion in 2016 to less than $5 billion in 2022.
The discrepancy in values between the BEA and Rhodium Group data is partially the result of of-
ficial data being distorted by companies’ usage of holding companies, offshore vehicles, and other
complex ownership structures to take advantage of favorable tax policies. Complicated deal struc-
tures with “indirect” holdings also make it difficult for statistical agencies to correctly separate
                                               432

billion of FDI stock in the United States.190 Policy changes in both
the United States and China contributed to the fall. Starting in
2016 and continuing through 2017, China directed its domestic in-
vestors to reduce certain foreign holdings and tightened the coun-
try’s capital controls.191 In 2018, the United States passed the For-
eign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA), which
expanded the jurisdiction of the Committee on Foreign Investment
in the United States (CFIUS) to block sensitive investments, most
notably from China.192
   CFIUS is an interagency committee chaired by the U.S. secretary
of the treasury that reviews certain FDI transactions in the U.S.
economy to ensure they do not impair U.S. national security.* FIR-
RMA strengthened and modernized CFIUS’s capacity to take a more
assertive role in scrutinizing U.S. inbound investment by broaden-
ing the scope of transactions CFIUS can or must review, shifting
the filing requirement from voluntary to mandatory in certain more
sensitive transactions, expanding the range of national security is-
sues to be considered, and providing more staff and funding to the
organization.193 While the new scrutiny enabled by FIRRMA likely
contributed to a drop in Chinese direct investment into the United
States, it has not changed the United States’ role as the largest
global recipient of FDI.194 From 2013 to 2017, prior to FIRRMA’s
passage, the United States accounted for 17.4 percent of global FDI
inflows.195 From 2018 to 2023, the United States’ share rose to 19.1
percent of global inflows.196
   FIRRMA helped trigger a global expansion of inbound investment
review regimes, restricting Chinese access to key technologies across
a range of different economies. The act directed the U.S. Department
of the Treasury to “facilitate the harmonization of action” on inbound
investments by conferring favored status within CFIUS on countries
with their own reliable screening mechanisms.197 In part because
of this, at least 37 countries now have regulatory frameworks for
screening investments on national security grounds, including most
EU members, the UK, and Japan.198
Outbound Investment Screening
  While negotiating FIRRMA, policymakers debated the merits of
restricting or screening U.S. outbound investments to China.199 Pro-
ponents hoped to address many of the same concerns that drive
existing restrictions, such as export controls—namely to prevent
U.S. resources from helping an adversary country advance tech-
nologically. Critics feared new restrictions would undermine the
United States’ position as the preeminent global capital market.200
Ultimately, a proposed outbound investment program was excluded
from FIRRMA.201 Since FIRRMA’s enactment, policymakers have
FDI from portfolio investment stakes in the surveys they use to collect their data. Alternative
data providers like Rhodium Group attempt to rectify this by taking a transactional approach
that tracks and captures individual transactions. Thilo Hanemann, Armand Meyer, and Danielle
Goh, “Vanishing Act: The Shrinking Footprint of Chinese Companies in the US,” Rhodium Group,
September 7, 2023; Thilo Hanemann et al., “Two-Way Street: 2021 Update US-China Investment
Trends,” US-China Investment Project, May 2021, 36.
  * CFIUS jurisdiction includes mergers, acquisitions, and takeovers that could result in foreign
control of a U.S. business; certain non-controlling investments in businesses involved in critical
technologies, critical infrastructure, or sensitive personal data (so-called “TID U.S. businesses”);
and certain real estate transactions. U.S. Department of the Treasury, CFIUS Frequently Asked
Questions.
                                             433

returned to outbound investment issues, in part in response to con-
tinued concerns over U.S. investment into China.202
The Scale of U.S. Outbound Investments into China
   Inadequate official U.S. government data collection and publica-
tion obscures the scale and sectoral allocation of U.S. investments
into China. Publicly accessible official U.S. government data do not
show U.S. investor positions based on the ultimate destination of
their direct and portfolio investments; instead, they permit the re-
porting of trillions of dollars of investment in the Cayman Islands
or other Caribbean islands. The data that is accessible is categorized
too broadly to discern the technologies or industries that U.S. in-
vestment benefits. Private data providers can address some of these
issues, but drawbacks in their collection methods mean they still
present an imperfect picture at best. Nevertheless, both official and
private data sources suggest that while total U.S. outbound invest-
ment flows to China have substantially declined in recent years, di-
rect investment in particular has become increasingly concentrated
in innovative sectors with implications for U.S. national security.203
Official U.S. Data on U.S. Outbound Investments into China
   At the end of 2023, U.S. official data showed the total U.S. di-
rect investment stock in mainland China to be $126.9 billion.204
Including Hong Kong and Macau, U.S. direct investment rises to
$218.5 billion, or 3.3 percent of total U.S. direct investment stock.205
As of 2022, the most recent year with complete data, accumulated
U.S. portfolio investment stock in mainland China was a much more
sizable $712 billion.206 Including Hong Kong and Macau, U.S. port-
folio investment stock rises to $910 billion ($860 billion in equity
investments and $50 billion in bonds), or 8.5 percent of U.S. foreign
investment stock.207
   In recent years, the growth of U.S. direct investment into China
has steadily declined. From 2008 until 2018, U.S. FDI into China in-
creased by an average of $10.4 billion a year. From 2019 to 2023, the
growth rate nearly halved, falling to $5.6 billion a year.208 Since the
end of 2020, the value of U.S portfolio stock has been falling, though
a significant portion of that likely resulted from a reduction in Chi-
nese company valuations rather than a reduction in volume.* 209 In
2022, the value of U.S. portfolio investment stock fell by $258.7 bil-
lion compared with 2021.210
Limitations of Official U.S. Data Sources on Outbound Investment
  A key challenge that has plagued discussions around a U.S. out-
bound investment mechanism—and the broader U.S.-China finan-
cial relationship—has been a lack of reliable, official data released
by the U.S. government. The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)
under the Commerce Department and the Treasury Department are
the primary government bodies responsible for collecting and pub-
  * From December 31, 2021, to December 30, 2022, the CSI 300, the benchmark of main-
land-traded stocks, fell 21.6 percent, almost identical to the 22.1 percent decline in the value
of U.S. portfolio investments in China. Shanghai Stock Exchange, “CSI 300 [2021–2023],” via
Haver Analytics; Carol C. Bertaut, Beau Bressler, and Stephanie Curcuru, “Globalization and
the Geography of Capital Flows,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System FEDS Notes,
December 15, 2023.
                                                434

lishing data on outbound financial flows.211 However, restrictions
around the collection and public reporting of U.S. outbound invest-
ment statistics likely obscure the ultimate scale of these flows and
prevent a detailed assessment of U.S. direct and portfolio invest-
ment in China.212
   Table 1: Official Annual Data Collection on U.S. Outbound Investment

  Data Type                Collecting Agency                             Limitations
 Direct            The Department of Commerce                Data reflect the place of in-
 Investment        Bureau of Economic Analysis               corporation of the immediate
                   (BEA)                                     investment counterpart, which
                                                             may not be the ultimate desti-
                                                             nation of the investment.*
                                                             Data are published with sector
                                                             categorizations that are too
                                                             broad to discern the specific
                                                             industries U.S. investment is
                                                             supporting.
 Portfolio         The Department of Treasury                Data reflect the place of in-
 Investment                                                  corporation of the immediate
                                                             investment counterpart, which
                                                             may not be the ultimate desti-
                                                             nation of the investment.
                                                             Data are published without any
                                                             sector categorizations.
  Source: Various.213

   U.S. direct investment statistics reflect the place of incorporation
of the immediate investment counterpart, which is not necessarily
the country that domiciles the ultimate beneficial owner (UBO).† 214
As a result, the $700 billion in reported direct investment stock in
offshore tax havens such as Caribbean island non-banking holding
companies and financial firms, for example, likely masks consider-
able additional investment flowing into China.215 Legal restrictions
within the International Investment and Trade in Services Survey
Act—which governs how the BEA is able to collect outbound direct
investment data—protect the confidentiality of the data that is re-
leased.216
   These privacy restrictions mean the sectoral breakdowns of U.S.
official data are also too broad to discern investment shifts into sec-
tors most relevant for national security. It is impossible to figure
  * Every five years, through the Benchmark Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad, the BEA
collects data on the universe of foreign affiliates of U.S. entities, including detailed balance sheet
and ownership information. By combining the data collected in the Benchmark Survey with data
from the BEA’s Quarterly Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad, BEA researchers have pro-
posed a methodology to reallocate the U.S. direct investment abroad position to the countries and
industries where it is ultimately invested. This reallocation suggests substantial U.S. outbound
investment flows to the Cayman Islands and other tax havens are eventually routed to China. For
example, using data from the 2019 Benchmark Survey, researchers found that in 2019 the U.S. di-
rect investment position in mainland China could be valued at $240 billion, or $140 billion dollars
more than what was estimated for that year in official BEA statistics. However, the reallocation
methods provide an imperfect and incomplete picture. Additional data would be needed to regu-
larly publish direct investment statistics that attribute investment to the ultimate host economy.
Kirsten Brew et al., “Experimental Ultimate Host Economy Statistics for U.S. Direct Investment
Abroad,” U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis, October 2023, 7–8, 24.
  † Ultimate beneficial ownership (UBO) refers to the person or entity that ultimately owns or
controls a company.
                                             435

out how much U.S. direct investment is flowing into China across
areas such as AI, quantum computing, and semiconductors, given
that the most detailed U.S. data end at “manufacturing of electrical
equipment, appliances, and components,” “information,” and “profes-
sional, scientific, and technical services.” 217 The BEA argues this
is to prevent its data from being used to discern information about
individual transactions, though analysts have challenged this as be-
ing overly cautious.218
   Data on U.S. portfolio investment in China suffer from issues sim-
ilar to those of direct investment. The Treasury Department’s Trea-
sury International Capital (TIC) system does not provide the UBO
of outbound portfolio investment transactions.219 However, other
parts of the Federal Government such as the Federal Reserve are
able to reconstruct portfolio investment beneficial ownership data-
sets, though with a severe time lag.220 Neither the TIC nor any
other parts of the Federal Government publish outbound portfolio
investment data organized by investment sector.221
Alternative Estimates of U.S. Direct Investment into China
  Private sector data sources, such as Pitchbook and fDi Markets,
can be an imperfect solution to the inadequacies of official direct
investment statistics. However, unlike official sources such as the
BEA, which impose mandatory reporting requirements, private
data collection firms must rely on methods that are inherently in-
complete.* Still, Pitchbook, a private data provider, can provide in-
sight into non-greenfield (mergers and acquisitions, private equity,
and venture investment) U.S. investment, which captures the lion’s
share of U.S. direct investment to China.† According to calculations
using Pitchbook data by Sarah Baurle Danzman, associate professor
at Indiana University Bloomington, new U.S. investment flows in
companies headquartered in mainland China, Hong Kong, or Macau
peaked in 2018 at just under $190 billion—a figure considerably
higher than official statistics.222 Investment volumes have declined
every year since 2021. In 2023, U.S. non-greenfield investment flow
to China was 30 percent of its 2021 value, or slightly below $40
billion.223
  While the absence of detailed, official U.S. data means it is im-
possible to get a complete picture of U.S. direct investment into
China, alternative data providers suggest U.S. investors continue to
make meaningful contributions to technology sectors at the heart
of U.S.-China strategic competition. The United States remains the
primary global investor in these sectors and the deals U.S. firms
make can generate national security concerns if U.S. investors pro-
vide capital and expertise that help China advance its capabilities
in sensitive technologies.224
  * Pitchbook, for example, relies on systematic web crawling and is therefore unable to capture
investments that have not been reported in regulatory filings, news articles, or press releases.
Michael R. Ryan, “Pitchbook Database,” Texas Tech University Innovation Hub at Research Park.
  † Calculations by Sarah Bauerle Danzman suggest the overwhelming majority of U.S. direct in-
vestment flows to China fall under these categories. Dr. Danzman finds U.S. investment through
mergers and acquisitions, private equity, and venture capital was about three times as large as
global greenfield foreign direct investment to China in 2022, with VC investment making up the
largest portion. Sarah Bauerle Danzman, statement for the record for U.S.-China Economic and
Security Review Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 2.
                                              436

  U.S. non-greenfield investment in strategic sectors such as semi-
conductors, quantum computing, and AI is a fraction of U.S. total
investment to China and is almost exclusively undertaken by ven-
ture capital (VC) firms.* 225 U.S. investment flows in semiconduc-
tors, quantum computing, and AI peaked in 2020 at nearly $17
billion before plummeting to around $2 billion in 2023, though as
discussed below they grew in 2024.226 Among those sectors, U.S.
investment is heavily concentrated in the semiconductor industry,
which accounted for over 90 percent of total U.S. investment in Chi-
na’s semiconductors, quantum computing, and AI sectors in 2020.227
U.S. investors have also been historically very involved with the
Chinese AI industry. An analysis by the Center for Security and
Emerging Technology (CSET) found that from 2015 to 2021, U.S. in-
vestors accounted for 37 percent of the $110 billion in global funding
raised by Chinese AI firms.† 228
  The United States is the most important foreign source of in-
vestment to semiconductors, quantum computing, and AI in Chi-
na.229 U.S. investors consistently contribute more than double
the capital to these sectors compared with all non-U.S. investors
combined. Despite increased government interest in an outbound
investment regime, U.S. investors remain keenly interested in
supporting and investing in China’s semiconductors, quantum
computing, and AI sectors.230 In the first half of 2024, U.S. direct
investment in those sectors had already surpassed the total value
of 2023.231
  Private sector data sources do not provide estimates of the total
allocation of U.S. portfolio investments in China by sector.232
Impact of Restricting U.S. Direct and Portfolio Investment
  Restricting U.S. direct or portfolio investment would have differ-
ent impacts on China’s innovation ecosystem. Halting the flow of
direct investment to specific sectors within the Chinese economy
would diminish certain companies’ access to funding and the intan-
gible benefits often associated with venture capital firms and ear-
ly-stage investors.233
  Direct investment often involves a long-term relationship that
gives control over or a significant degree of influence on the man-
agement of an enterprise. Historically, China has enforced strin-
gent restrictions on direct investment flows into the country and
has forced U.S. and other foreign businesses to acquiesce to joint
ventures with Chinese firms and sign over their IP and technology
to access the Chinese market.234 Because of the strategic nature of
the investment, in addition to providing capital or technology, U.S.
investors often also provide intangible benefits to recipient compa-
nies, including an enhanced global reputation, managerial expertise,
talent networks, a deep understanding of technology, and U.S. mar-
ket access.235
  * In calculating investment size, Dr. Danzman specifically defines these sectors to include semi-
conductors, edge computing semiconductors, generative AI, post-quantum cryptography, quantum
computing, quantum sensing, and swarm AI.
  † CSET researchers used Crunchbase as their data source instead of Pitchbook, which is the
source of the other non-greenfield investment statistics referenced earlier. Without an official
source, and because private sector sources have to rely on inherently incomplete collection meth-
ods such as web scraping, there may be some minor divergences in the data provided by both
sources.
                                               437

   Intangible benefits can be especially meaningful for companies
in the startup or early growth phase. When working with founders
who are often young and inexperienced, intangible benefits such as
how to manage complex supply chains, maintain a skilled workforce,
and develop commercial strategies can be critical in determining the
success or failure of young technology companies.236
   The scale of U.S. passive investments into China has also gener-
ated national security concerns. The relative ease at which transac-
tions can happen mean the value of U.S. portfolio investment stock
in China was far larger than the value of U.S. direct investment
stock.* 237 Such massive differences in magnitude can help offset the
lack of intangible benefits offered.238 Abundant U.S. equity invest-
ments in Chinese markets can help Chinese companies by reducing
their costs of capital, allowing them to acquire other businesses with
company stock, and attracting and compensating top talent with
company stock and stock options.239
   As of 2022, U.S. portfolio holdings of equity made up 5.3 percent
of China’s domestic market capitalization.† United States firms are
likely the largest foreign holder of Chinese equities.‡ 240 Therefore,
while nothing blocks other foreign capital from backfilling any lost
U.S. equity investments, the relative scarcity of global capital, com-
bined with the weak performance of Chinese equity markets in re-
cent years, may mean there are insufficient alternative sources to
fully make up for U.S. portfolio investments. The United States is
by far the largest global investor, making up 25.5 percent of total
foreign portfolio investments as of December 2023.241 Including the
United States’ G7 allies, which are also considering an outbound
investment screening mechanism, this share jumps to 72.2 percent
of global foreign equity investments (as of December 2023, the G7
makes up 48 percent of foreign holdings in the Chinese equity mar-
ket and 59.3 percent of the Hong Kong equity market).§ 242 This sig-
   * In 2022, the official value of U.S. portfolio investment stock was 435 percent of direct invest-
ment ($910 billion in portfolio investment stock and $209 billion in direct investment stock).
However, limitations in official data collection of U.S. direct investment likely mean the true
percentage could be different. Carol C. Bertaut, Beau Bressler, and Stephanie Curcuru, “Global-
ization and the Geography of Capital Flows,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
FEDS Notes, December 15, 2023; U.S. Department of Commerce, “Direct Investment by Country
and Industry, 2022— U.S. Direct Investment Position Abroad on a Historical-Cost Basis, By Coun-
try and Industry [2022],” July 20, 2023.
   † This calculation was done by dividing the Federal Reserve’s estimate for U.S. holdings of Chi-
nese and Hong Kong securities by their respective stock market capitalization (China at $11.47
trillion and Hong Kong at $4.57 trillion). World Bank Group, “Market Capitalization of Listed
Domestic Companies (Current US$) - China, Hong Kong SAR, China”; Carol C. Bertaut, Beau
Bressler, and Stephanie Curcuru, “Globalization and the Geography of Capital Flows,” Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System FEDS Notes, December 15, 2023.
   ‡ Based on the Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS), a voluntary data collection ex-
ercise conducted under the auspices of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the United States
is the largest foreign holder of Chinese and Hong Kong equities with nearly double the assets
of the next-largest foreign holder, Singapore. Importantly, however, the CPIS dataset is reliant
on national sources to build these data. As a result, the IMF reports 2022 U.S. equity holdings
in China and Hong Kong as $367 billion, which is derived from Treasury Department data on
residency. This is far lower than the Fed’s nationality-adjusted value of $860 billion. While this
adjustment could mean U.S. investors are by far the largest and most important foreign investor
in Chinese equities, contributing four times as much capital as Singapore, the prevalence of tax
havens and the imprecision of investment data likely indicate that other countries’ total assets
are underreported as well. International Monetary Fund, “Coordinated Portfolio Investment Sur-
vey–Derived Portfolio Investment Liabilities (All Economies) by Economy of Nonresident Holder:
Total Portfolio Investment (Derived from Creditor Data),” June 2023.
   § Note that CPIS includes mainland China as a foreign investor of the Hong Kong equity mar-
ket and Hong Kong as a foreign investor of the mainland China equity market. The calculations
exclude China and Hong Kong, respectively, as a foreign investor.
                                            438

nificant share of assets means that if the G7 eventually implements
outbound investment restrictions on portfolio investment across all
its member economies, it could significantly impact Chinese public
companies’ access to capital and reduce their ability to compensate
talent or conduct mergers and acquisitions.243
Ongoing Efforts to Regulate Outbound Investment Screening
   Ongoing U.S. investment into China raises concerns that remain
unaddressed by existing U.S. authorities. CFIUS screens many types
of investments into the United States for national security risks, but
not outbound flows. Export controls can mitigate the risk from the
transfer of sensitive U.S. technologies and prohibit such transfers
as part of an investment or via R&D collaboration, but they do not
cover other risks that arise from capital investments, particularly
VC/FDI. Policymakers have been engaged in an active debate about
whether to create an outbound investment screening mechanism,
how broad to scope it both in terms of the sectors and the types of
investment to be covered, and otherwise how best to structure such
a system to achieve the desired policy goals but not interfere with
status of the United States as the premier global financial center. In
August 2023, the White House issued an EO directing the Treasury
Department to create an outbound investment review regime, and
debates in Congress continue.*

Implications for the United States
   Economic statecraft has become the United States’ tool of first
resort in addressing the threats China poses to key U.S. interests.
Policymakers in Washington have turned to trade measures, export
controls and sanctions, and foreign investment reviews to address
longstanding concerns about Chinese non-market practices, forced
technology transfer, civil-military fusion, Chinese technological and
military modernization, and the specter of military confrontation.
Some of these tools have not been used at scale in a generation. As a
result, the use of each needs to be reviewed regularly to ensure each
is addressing the unique challenges posed by the Chinese economy
and its system at large.
   How the United States coordinates and communicates its trade
policy will play a central role in effectively wielding trade instru-
ments to promote resilient and fair economic relations with China.
Since 2017, the United States has more aggressively utilized a broad-
er range of trade authorities. However, these tariffs and other trade
tools—as blunt yet powerful instruments—have led to wide-ranging
effects on the U.S. economy, promoting trade and supply chain objec-
tives in some areas while imposing costs in others. The effectiveness
of these trade policies can be enhanced through better calibration
of the policy mix. China’s surging manufacturing capacity and ex-
ports in 2024 and its efforts to develop national champions in key
technology areas further underlie the need for a dynamic and stra-
tegic approach to counter China’s unfair trade practices. Above all,
a comprehensive and coherent trade policy must start by addressing
  * For additional background on the EO, refer to Appendix II, “Executive Order on an Outbound
Investment Security Program.”
                                 439

unresolved questions about U.S. goals and articulating a vision of
the desired future U.S.-China economic relationship.
   The United States has led a number of key allies to introduce ex-
port controls on strategic technologies, most notably semiconductors
and semiconductor manufacturing equipment. Through an iterative
and collaborative process, the United States has demonstrated both
the national security necessity for export controls and that export
controls can effectively slow the technological advancement of ad-
versarial nations. The United States should continue to anticipate
rapid development in these areas, requiring constant recalibration
and coordination with allies and partners on what constitutes a cut-
ting-edge technology. Simultaneously, the United States should not
lose sight of legacy chips. Chinese dominance of legacy chip produc-
tion could create new risks for U.S. commercial supply chains and
military procurement. (For more on U.S.-China technology competi-
tion, see Chapter 3, “U.S.-China Competition in Emerging Technol-
ogies.”)
   Debate continues around the desirability of an outbound invest-
ment mechanism and how it should be designed and implemented.
Broad bipartisan consensus calls for a new tool to stem the flow of
capital and nontangible know-how from the United States’ preemi-
nent firms into advanced Chinese technology companies. The August
2023 outbound investment EO is a starting point. However, a dura-
ble mechanism will likely need to be founded in legislation. A num-
ber of debates around its scope also remain, including the types of
investments that should be prohibited. A further challenge in shap-
ing the mechanism is the lack of data around U.S. investments into
China. The pervasive use of offshore tax havens and an inability to
access granular, sectoral data mean policymakers are flying blind
when determining the scale and scope of investment prohibitions.
   However, the size and salience of China mean that no single U.S.
economic statecraft tool will be a panacea for the challenges its
economy poses. Trade measures, export controls and sanctions, and
investment restrictions will need to work in tandem to achieve the
United States’ most ambitious and important goals. This means that
the policy work cannot end when each tool is adopted and stream-
lined to address the issues in its specific domain. U.S officials must
continuously dismantle bureaucratic siloes and compel implement-
ing agencies to work toward a unified strategy.
                                      440

         Appendix I: Current Multilateral Export
                    Control Regimes
                                                   Missile
                    Nuclear                      Technology
                   Suppliers        Australia      Control        Wassenaar
   Regime:          Group            Group         Regime        Arrangement
 Founded in:          1974            1985           1987            1996
Covered          Nuclear and      Equipment,     Unmanned        Convention-
Technologies:    nuclear-relat-   materials,     aerial vehi-    al arms and
                 ed materials,    technology,    cles capable    dual-use items
                 software, and    and software   of delivering   and technol-
                 technology       that could     weapons of      ogies
                                  contribute     mass destruc-
                                  to chemical    tion
                                  and biologi-
                                  cal weapons
                                  activities
Argentina              ×                ×              ×               ×

Australia              ×                ×              ×               ×

Austria                ×                ×              ×               ×

Belarus                ×

Belgium                ×                ×              ×               ×

Brazil                 ×                               ×

Bulgaria               ×                ×              ×               ×

Canada                 ×                ×              ×               ×

China                  ×

Croatia                ×                ×                              ×

Cyprus                 ×                ×

Czech Republic         ×                ×              ×               ×

Denmark                ×                ×              ×               ×

Estonia                ×                ×                              ×
European                                ×
Union
Finland                ×                ×              ×               ×

France                 ×                ×              ×               ×

Germany                ×                ×              ×               ×

Greece                 ×                ×              ×               ×

Hungary                ×                ×              ×               ×

Iceland                ×                ×              ×

India                                   ×              ×               ×
                                     441

                                                  Missile
                   Nuclear                      Technology
                  Suppliers        Australia      Control        Wassenaar
   Regime:         Group            Group         Regime        Arrangement
 Founded in:         1974            1985           1987            1996
Covered         Nuclear and      Equipment,     Unmanned        Convention-
Technologies:   nuclear-relat-   materials,     aerial vehi-    al arms and
                ed materials,    technology,    cles capable    dual-use items
                software, and    and software   of delivering   and technol-
                technology       that could     weapons of      ogies
                                 contribute     mass destruc-
                                 to chemical    tion
                                 and biologi-
                                 cal weapons
                                 activities
Ireland               ×                ×              ×               ×

Italy                 ×                ×              ×               ×

Japan                 ×                ×              ×               ×

Kazakhstan            ×

Latvia                ×                ×                              ×

Lithuania             ×                ×                              ×

Luxembourg            ×                ×              ×               ×

Malta                 ×                ×                              ×

Mexico                ×                ×                              ×

Netherlands           ×                ×              ×               ×

New Zealand           ×                ×              ×               ×

Norway                ×                ×              ×               ×

Poland                ×                ×              ×               ×

Portugal              ×                ×              ×               ×
Republic of           ×                ×              ×               ×
Korea
Romania               ×                ×                              ×

Russia                ×                               ×               ×

Serbia                ×
Slovakia              ×                ×                              ×

Slovenia              ×                ×                              ×

South Africa          ×                               ×               ×

Spain                 ×                ×              ×               ×

Sweden                ×                ×              ×               ×

Switzerland           ×                ×              ×               ×
                                           442

                                                        Missile
                         Nuclear                      Technology
                        Suppliers        Australia      Control        Wassenaar
   Regime:               Group            Group         Regime        Arrangement
 Founded in:               1974            1985           1987            1996
Covered               Nuclear and      Equipment,     Unmanned        Convention-
Technologies:         nuclear-relat-   materials,     aerial vehi-    al arms and
                      ed materials,    technology,    cles capable    dual-use items
                      software, and    and software   of delivering   and technol-
                      technology       that could     weapons of      ogies
                                       contribute     mass destruc-
                                       to chemical    tion
                                       and biologi-
                                       cal weapons
                                       activities
Turkey                      ×                ×              ×               ×

Ukraine                     ×                ×              ×               ×
United                      ×                ×              ×               ×
Kingdom
United States               ×                ×              ×               ×
Source: Various.244
                                                443

  Appendix II: Executive Order on an Outbound
         Investment Security Program
   On August 9, 2023, in response to worsening relations and the con-
tinued flow of U.S. investment into key Chinese technology sectors, the
White House issued an EO, “Addressing United States Investments
in Certain National Security Technologies and Products in Countries
of Concern,” establishing an outbound investment regime.245 The EO
takes a sectoral approach focusing on U.S. investments in China across
a narrow set of technologies related to semiconductors and microelec-
tronics, quantum information technologies, and AI systems.246 The EO
is rooted in the authority granted to the president by the International
Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA).* 247
   Shortly after the EO was released, the Treasury Department is-
sued an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPRM) that
outlined the proposed outbound investment regime and sought pub-
lic comments.248 In July 2024, the ANPRM was followed up with
a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM), which detailed the Ad-
ministration’s current thinking on how to design and implement an
outbound investment mechanism.† 249
   The program aims to limit investment by U.S. persons ‡ in Chi-
nese entities that are involved in—or in certain circumstances may
become involved in—the development or production of covered tech-
nologies.§ It would do this by proposing two categories of concern
for outbound direct investments: notifiable transactions that could
contribute to a national security threat and prohibited transactions
   * IEEPA grants the president sweeping authority to “nullify, void, prevent, or prohibit” trans-
actions, 50 U.S.C. § 1702(a)(1)(B), in response to “any unusual and extraordinary threat . . . to the
national security, foreign policy, or economy of the United States,” 50 U.S.C. § 1701(a).
   † While the ANPRM and the NPRM are very similar they do have a few important differences.
The definition of AI was harmonized to align with other EOs such as EO 14110. The NPRM
elaborates on and refines some ambiguities around the knowledge standard (which describes the
knowledge a U.S. person must have about certain facts and circumstances related to a transaction
to trigger obligations under the proposed rule); clarifies applicability in very specific transactions
types; provides a new exception for transactions involving persons of third countries that have
similar measures aimed at outbound investments; and clarifies the scope of limited partner in-
vestments that would be covered by the proposed rule and those that would be excepted. U.S.
Department of the Treasury, Office of Investment Security, FACT SHEET: Treasury Department
Issues Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on Implementation of Outbound Investment Executive Or-
der (E.O. 14105), June 21, 2024.
   ‡ The EO and NPRM impose compliance obligations on “U.S. persons,” defined as a U.S. citizen
or lawful permanent resident, as well as any entity organized under the United States or any
jurisdiction within the United States, including those entities’ foreign subsidiaries. Notably, the
non-U.S. entity also falls under the jurisdiction of the mechanism if it has a majority owner,
general partner, or investment adviser to a pooled investment fund that falls under the defini-
tion of a U.S. person. Similar to economic sanctions, the rules would also prohibit a U.S. person
from making or substantially participating in transactions on behalf of a non-U.S. person that
would be prohibited if undertaken by a U.S. person. U.S. Department of the Treasury, “Provi-
sions Pertaining to U.S. Investments in Certain National Security Technologies and Products in
Countries of Concern,” Federal Register 89:129 (July 5, 2024); Antonia I. Tzinova et al., “Treasury
Department Issues Long-Awaited Proposed Rule on Outbound Investment Screening,” Holland
& Knight, June 26, 2024; U.S. Department of the Treasury, “Provisions Pertaining to U.S. Invest-
ments in Certain National Security Technologies and Products in Countries of Concern,” Federal
Register 89:129 (July 5, 2024).
   § The NPRM defines this as “covered transactions,” which happen when a “U.S. person” trans-
acts with a “covered foreign person.” A “covered foreign person” is defined as a “person of a
country of concern” that engages in activity related to the technologies specified as notifiable or
prohibited in the proposed regulations. “Person of a country of concern” covers any entity head-
quartered in, with a principal place of business in, or organized in the People’s Republic of China,
Hong Kong, and Macau (China); an individual who is a citizen or permanent resident of China;
or an entity that is directly or indirectly majority-owned by a Chinese person. U.S. Department
of the Treasury, “Provisions Pertaining to U.S. Investments in Certain National Security Technol-
ogies and Products in Countries of Concern,” Federal Register 89:129 (July 5, 2024).
                                             444

that “pose a particularly acute national security threat” because of
their potential to significantly advance the “military, intelligence,
surveillance, or cyber-enabled capabilities” of countries of con-
cern.250 However, any notifiable transaction would be automatically
prohibited if the Chinese entity party to the transaction is listed on
any one of several U.S. government lists primarily used for export
controls and sanctions, including the Entity List and the Specially
Designated Nationals (SDN) list.251
  Unlike CFIUS, the outbound investment program would not op-
erate through a case-by-case review or preapproval requirement.
Violations would be retroactively enforced though civil and crimi-
nal penalties.252 While the Administration’s approach to prohibited
transactions is consistent with its “small yard, high fence” strategy,
the regime’s notification requirements are far broader and are in-
tended to fill in critical gaps regarding the United States’ under-
standing of the nature and scale of domestic investments in Chinese
high-tech sectors. (For more, see “Limitations of Official U.S. Data
Sources on Outbound Investment” in this chapter.) 253
                Table 2: NPRM Proposed Approach to Notifiable and
                             Prohibited Transactions

   Technology           Notifiable Transaction               Prohibited Transaction
 Semiconductors       The design, fabrication, and        Developing or producing advanced
 and                  packaging of any integrated         integrated circuit design and
 microelectronics     circuit that is not covered by      equipment software; developing or
                      the definition of prohibited        producing specific front-end semi-
                      transactions.                       conductor fabrication, advanced
                                                          packaging, or extreme ultraviolet
                                                          lithography equipment; designing,
                                                          fabricating, or packaging integrat-
                                                          ed circuits that meet or exceed
                                                          advanced technical thresholds;
                                                          developing, installing, selling, or
                                                          producing any supercomputer.
 AI systems           Designed to be used by              AI systems designed to be exclu-
                      government intelligence or          sively used for military, govern-
                      military; cybersecurity appli-      ment intelligence, or mass sur-
                      cations, digital forensics tools,   veillance; frontier AI models; AI
                      penetration testing tools, or       systems trained using a certain
                      the control of robotics systems;    quantity of computing power; and
                      trained using a quantity of         AI systems trained with biological
                      computing power greater than        sequence data.
                      an amount yet to be deter-
                      mined; specialized AI models
                      trained on high-quality data.
 Quantum              None                                Developing a quantum computer
 information                                              or producing any of its criti-
 technologies                                             cal components; developing or
                                                          producing any quantum sensing
                                                          platform designed for government,
                                                          intelligence, or mass surveillance
                                                          purposes; developing or producing
                                                          certain quantum networks or
                                                          quantum communication systems.
  Source: U.S. Department of the Treasury, “Provisions Pertaining to U.S. Investments in Certain
National Security Technologies and Products in Countries of Concern,” Federal Register 89:129
(July 5, 2024).
                                             445

  The Administration’s program specifically covers active invest-
ments, sometimes called “smart money,” including the acquisition of
equity interests (mergers and acquisitions, private equity, and VC),
contingent equity interests, greenfield investments, joint ventures,
and equity-convertible debt financing.254 It notably carves out pas-
sive investments such as publicly traded securities; securities issued
by an investment company, like an index fund, mutual fund, or ex-
change traded fund; and pooled investment funds.* 255




  * Treasury is still finalizing its approach to investments in pooled funds and has proposed two
approaches. The first exempts them so long as the U.S. investor’s rights are consistent with a
passive investment and their capital is not more than 50 percent of the total assets under man-
agement. The second caps their investment at $1 million. Janet K. Kim, Sylwia A. Lis, and Rob
O’Brien, “US Treasury Department Issues Proposed Rules Restricting US Outbound Investment
in Advanced Technologies Involving China,” Baker McKenzie, June 25, 2024.
                                       446
                       ENDNOTES FOR CHAPTER 6
  1. White House, Global Economic Growth and Steel Excess Capacity, September
14, 2016; Robert B. Zoellick, “Whither China: From Membership to Responsibility?”
Remarks to National Committee on U.S.-China Relations, September 21, 2005.
  2. Henry Farrell and Abraham Newman, “The New Economic Security State,” For-
eign Affairs, October 19, 2023; White House, Fact Sheet: The Obama Administration’s
Record on the Trade Enforcement, January 12, 2017.
  3. National Committee on U.S.-China Relations and Rhodium Group, “Two-Way
Street 25 Years of US-China Direct Investment,” November 14, 2016; White House,
Fact Sheet: U.S.-China Economic Relations, September 25, 2015; Cathleen D. Cimi-
no-Isaacs and Karen M. Sutter, “Proposals to Regulate U.S. Outbound Investment to
China,” Congressional Research Service IF 12629, April 8, 2014.
  4. Henry Farrell and Abraham Newman, “The New Economic Security State,” For-
eign Affairs, October 19, 2023; White House, United States Strategic Approach to the
People’s Republic of China, May 26, 2020, 12.
  5. Chairman James Comer, opening remarks for U.S. House of Representatives
Committee on Oversight and Accountability, Hearing on Defending America from
the Chinese Communist Party’s Political Warfare, Part III, September 24, 2024;
Zack Cooper, “Does America Have an End Game on China?” China File, December
15, 2023; Ely Ratner et al., “Rising to the China Challenge Renewing American
Competitiveness in the Indo-Pacific,” Center for a New American Security, January
28, 2020.
  6. Dan Wang, “Biden Is Beating China on Chips. It May Not Be Enough,” New York
Times, July 16, 2023.
  7. White House, Building Resilient Supply Chains, Revitalizing American Manu-
facturing, and Fostering Broad-Based Growth, June 2021.
  8. David Shepardson, “China Import Concerns Spur U.S. to Launch Semiconductor
Supply Chain Review,” Reuters, December 21, 2023.
  9. David Feith and Ben Noon, “Next U.S.-China Chip Battle Will Require More
Than Export Controls,” Nikkei Asia, May 10, 2024.
  10. Emily Kilcrease, written testimony for U.S. House of Representatives Commit-
tee on Financial Services, Hearing on Better Investment Barriers: Strengthening CCP
Sanctions and Exploring Alternatives to Bureaucratic Regimes, January 30, 2024.
  11. Barry Pavel and Alex Ward, “Purpose of a National Security Strategy,” Atlantic
Council, February 28, 2019.
  12. White House, National Security Strategy, October 12, 2022.
  13. Andres B. Schwarzenberg, “U.S. Trade Policy: Future Direction and Key Eco-
nomic Debates,” Congressional Research Service CRS IF 12327, February 14, 2024, 1.
  14. Chad P. Bown, “The 2018 U.S.-China Trade Conflict after Forty Years of Special
Protection,” China Economic Journal 12:2 (2019): 109.
  15. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, 2023 Report to Congress on China’s
WTO Compliance, February 2024; Gerard DiPippo, Ilaria Mazzocco, and Scott Ken-
nedy, “Red Ink: Estimating Chinese Industrial Policy Spending in Comparative Per-
spective,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, May 23, 2022; Christopher
Wray, “The Threat Posed by the Chinese Government and the Chinese Communist
Party to the Economic and National Security of the United States,” Video Event on
China’s Attempt to Influence U.S. Institutions, Hudson Institute, Washington, DC,
July 7, 2020; Commission on the Theft of American Intellectual Property, “Update
to the IP Commission Report,” February 2017, 13–16; Mark Wu, “The ‘China, Inc.’
Challenge to Global Trade Governance,” Harvard International Law Journal 52:2
(Spring 2016): 261–324; Jennifer Hillman, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on U.S. Tools to Address Chinese Market
Distortions, June 8, 2018.
  16. Michael Pettis and Erica Hogan, “Trade Intervention for Freer Trade,” Carne-
gie Endowment for International Peace, October 2024, 3–9; Gordon Hanson, written
testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on
Consumer Products from China: Safety, Regulations, and Supply Chains, March 1,
2024; Adam Wolfe, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Consumer Products from China: Safety, Regulations, and
Supply Chains, March 1, 2024.
  17. Chad P. Bown, “The 2018 U.S.-China Trade Conflict after Forty Years of Special
Protection,” China Economic Journal 12:2 (2019): 109.
  18. Emily Blanchard, “Non-Trade Objectives and New Frontiers for Research in
International Economic Policy,” in Ana Fernandes, Nadia Rocha, and Michele Ruta,
eds., Beyond Trade: How Deep Trade Agreements Shape Non-Trade Outcomes, 2023,
99–100.
                                         447
   19. Ryan Hass, “How Will Biden and Trump Tackle Trade with China?” Brook-
ings Institution, April 4, 2024; Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, Opening
Statement of USTR Robert Lighthizer to the House Ways and Means Committee,
March 21, 2018.
   20. Chad P. Bown, “The U.S.-China Trade War and Phase One Agreement,” Journal
of Policy Modeling 43:4 (2021): 808.
   21. Chad P. Bown, “U.S.-China Trade War Tariffs: An Up-to-Date Chart,” April 6,
2023; Chad P. Bown, “The U.S.-China Trade War and Phase One Agreement,” Journal
of Policy Modeling 43:4 (2021): 827.
   22. Liana Wong, “Safeguards: Section 201 of the Trade Act of 1974,” Congressional
Research Service CRS IF 10786, January 13, 2021.
   23. Douglas Irwin, Clashing over Commerce: A History of U.S. Trade Policy, Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 2017, 586.
   24. Trade Act of 1974 § 201, Pub. L. No. 93–619, 1974, codified at 19 U.S.C. § 2251.
   25. Joshua E. Kurland, “Dusting-Off Section 201: Re-Examining a Previously Dor-
mant Trade Remedy,” Georgetown Journal of International Law 49:2 (Winter 2018):
613.
   26. Joshua E. Kurland, “Dusting-Off Section 201: Re-Examining a Previously Dor-
mant Trade Remedy,” Georgetown Journal of International Law 49:2 (Winter 2018):
613–616; Noah Glazier, “Legal Framework and Economic Critique: Trump’s Trade
Authority and Policy,” South Carolina Journal of Law and Business 14:1 (Fall 2017):
37–39.
   27. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, Fact Sheet: Section 201 Cases: Imported
Large Residential Washing Machines and Imported Solar Cells and Modules.
   28. White House, FACT SHEET: Biden-Harris Administration Takes Action to
Strengthen American Solar Manufacturing and Protect Manufacturers and Workers
from China’s Unfair Trade Practices, May 16, 2024; White House, A Proclamation
to Continue Facilitating Positive Adjustment to Competition from Imports of Certain
Crystalline Silicon Photovoltaic Cells (Whether or Not Partially or Fully Assembled
into Other Products), February 4, 2022.
   29. John Fitzgerald Weaver, “Solar Panel Import Tariffs Increase U.S. Module Price
by Up to 286%,” PV Magazine, June 10, 2024.
   30. John Fitzgerald Weaver, “Solar Panel Import Tariffs Increase U.S. Module Price
by Up to 286%,” PV Magazine, June 10, 2024.
   31. John Fitzgerald Weaver, “Solar Panel Import Tariffs Increase U.S. Module Price
by Up to 286%,” PV Magazine, June 10, 2024.
   32. Kelly Pickerel, “AD/CVD Moratorium on Southeast Asian Solar Imports Expires
Today—Does It Even Matter?” Solar Power World, June 6, 2024; Liana Wong, Man-
preet Singh, and Christopher A. Casey, “Circumvention Inquiry into Solar Imports,”
Congressional Research Service CRS IN 11946, August 24, 2023; U.S. Department of
Commerce, Department of Commerce Issues Final Determination of Circumvention
Inquiries of Solar Cells and Modules from China, August 18, 2023.
   33. U.S. Department of Commerce International Trade Administration, “Crystal-
line Silicon Photovoltaic Cells, Whether or Not Assembled into Modules, from Cam-
bodia, Malaysia, Thailand, and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam: Initiation of Coun-
tervailing Duty Investigations,” Federal Register 89:43816 (May 20, 2024).
   34. U.S. International Trade Commission, Crystalline Silicon Photovoltaic Cells,
Whether or Not Assembled into Modules from, Cambodia, Malaysia, Thailand, and
Vietnam, June 2024, 64–65.
   35. Elizabeth Drake, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Consumer Products from China: Safety, Regulations,
and Supply Chains, March 1, 2024, 12.
   36. White House, A Proclamation to Continue Facilitating Positive Adjustment to
Competition from Imports of Certain Crystalline Silicon Photovoltaic Cells (Whether
or Not Partially or Fully Assembled into Other Products), February 4, 2022; Cara
Marcy, “U.S. Imports of Solar Photovoltaic Modules Mainly Come from Asia,” U.S.
Energy Information Administration, February 14, 2018; U.S. International Trade
Commission, Crystalline Silicon Photovoltaic Cells (Whether or not Partially or Fully
Assembled into Other Products)—Investigation No. TA-201-75, Volume I: Determina-
tion and Views of Commissioners, November 2017, 29, 44–45.
   37. Carl A. Velnstein, Casey Weaver, and Kathelyn M. Hilferty, “Navigating the
New Solar Trade Landscape,” Morgan Lewis, June 20, 2024; Jennifer A. Dlouhy,
“Biden Seeks to Bolster Solar Manufacturers with Tax and Trade Moves,” Bloomberg,
May 16, 2024.
   38. Harry Clark and Gregory I. Hume, “Frenetic Activity Regarding Solar Energy
Equipment Import Duties,” Orrick, May 20, 2024.
                                         448
   39. Cathleen D. Cimino-Isaacs and Michael A. Weber, “Section 307 and Imports
Produced by Forced Labor,” Congressional Research Service CRS IF 11360, October
25, 2023.
   40. Nichola Groom and Richard Valdmanis, “U.S. Solar Panel Imports from China
Grow, Alleviating Gridlock, Officials Say,” Reuters, March 6, 2023.
   41. John Fitzgerald Weaver, “Solar Panel Import Tariffs Increase U.S. Module Price
by Up to 286%,” PV Magazine, June 10, 2024.
   42. Chad P. Bown and Eva (Yiwen) Zhang, “Measuring Trump’s 2018 Trade Pro-
tection: Five Takeaways,” Peterson Institute for International Economics, February
15, 2019.
   43. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, Section 232
Investigations: The Effects of Imports on the National Security.
   44. Rachel F. Fefer, “Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962,” Congressio-
nal Research Service CRS IF 10667, April 1, 2022, 2; U.S. Department of Commerce
Bureau of Industry and Security, Section 232 Investigations Program Guide, June
2007, 13–20.
   45. Doug Palmer, “U.S. Decides against National Security Tariffs on Rare Earth
Magnets from China, Japan, EU,” Politico, September 21, 2022; Rachel F. Fefer, “Sec-
tion 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962,” Congressional Research Service CRS
IF 10667, April 1, 2022, 2.
   46. Rachel F. Fefer, “Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962,” Congressio-
nal Research Service CRS IF 10667, April 1, 2022, 2; U.S. Department of Commerce
Bureau of Industry and Security, Section 232 Investigations: The Effects of Imports
on the National Security.
   47. Sandler, Travis & Roseberg, P.A., “Section 232 Tariffs on Steel & Aluminum.”
   48. Trade Act of 1974 § 301, Pub. L. No. 93–618, codified at 19 U.S.C. § 2411.
   49. Andres B. Schwarzenberg, “Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974: Origin, Evo-
lution, and Use,” Congressional Research Service CRS R 46604, December 14, 2020,
53–59.
   50. Chad P. Bown, “U.S.-China Trade War Tariffs: An Up-to-Date Chart,” Peterson
Institute for International Economies, April 6, 2023.
   51. U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Trade Statistics, May 3, 2024. https://web.
archive.org/web/20240531200327/https://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/stats/trade.
   52. U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Trade Statistics, November 29, 2019.
https://web.archive.org/web/20191130141438/https://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/stats/
trade.
   53. Jamieson Greer, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 2.
   54. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, Four-Year Review of Actions Taken in
the Section 301 Investigation: China’s Acts, Policies, and Practices Related to Technol-
ogy Transfer, Intellectual Property, and Innovation, May 14, 2024, 84.
   55. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, U.S. Trade Representative Katherine
Tai to Take Further Action on China Tariffs after Releasing Statutory Four-Year Re-
view, May 14, 2024.
   56. Camila Domonoske, “Five Takeaways from Biden’s Tariff Hikes on Chinese
Electric Vehicles,” NPR, May 14, 2024.
   57. White House, FACT SHEET: President Biden Takes Action to Protect American
Workers and Businesses from China’s Unfair Trade Practices, May 14, 2024; Office
of the U.S. Trade Representative, U.S. Trade Representative Katherine Tai to Take
Further Action on China Tariffs after Releasing Statutory Four-Year Review, May 14,
2024.
   58. Center for Strategic and International Studies, “Experts React: Energy and
Trade Implications of Tariffs on Chinese Imports,” May 14, 2023.
   59. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, USTR Initiates Section 301 Investi-
gation of China’s Targeting of the Maritime, Logistics, and Shipbuilding Sectors for
Dominance, April 17, 2024.
   60. Karen M. Sutter, “U.S.-China Phase One Trade Deal,” Congressional Research
Service CRS IF 1215, December 16, 2022.
   61. Chad P. Bown, “China Bought None of the Extra $200 Billion of U.S. Exports
in Trump’s Trade Deal,” Peterson Institute for International Economics, July 19, 2022.
   62. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, Four-Year Review of Actions Taken in
the Section 301 Investigation: China’s Acts, Policies, and Practices Related to Technol-
ogy Transfer, Intellectual Property, and Innovation, May 14, 2024, 15.
   63. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, Four-Year Review of Actions Taken in
the Section 301 Investigation: China’s Acts, Policies, and Practices Related to Technol-
ogy Transfer, Intellectual Property, and Innovation, May 14, 2024, 83.
                                         449
   64. U.S. Census Bureau, USA Trade Online, October 11, 2024.
   65. U.S. International Trade Commission, Economic Impacts of Section 232 and
301 Tariffs on U.S. Industries, May 2023, 23, 148–149.
   66. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, U.S. Trade Representative Katherine
Tai to Take Further Action on China Tariffs after Releasing Statutory Four-Year Re-
view, May 14, 2024.
   67. Robert E. Scott and Adam S. Hersh, “Tariff Increases Did Not Cause Inflation,
and Their Removal Would Undermine Domestic Supply Chains,” Economic Policy In-
stitute, January 19, 2022.
   68. U.S. International Trade Commission, Economic Impacts of Section 232 and
301 Tariffs on U.S. Industries, May 2023, 23–24.
   69. U.S. International Trade Commission, Economic Impacts of Section 232 and
301 Tariffs on U.S. Industries, May 2023, 147–148.
   70. Jamieson Greer, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 8.
   71. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, Four-Year Review of Actions Taken in
the Section 301 Investigation: China’s Acts, Policies, and Practices Related to Technol-
ogy Transfer, Intellectual Property, and Innovation, May 14, 2024, 77–78.
   72. Adam. S. Hersh and Robert E. Scott, “Why Global Steel Surpluses Warrant U.S.
Section 232 Import Measures,” Economic Policy Institute, March 24, 2021.
   73. Kadee Russ and Lydia Cox, “Steel Tariffs and U.S. Jobs Revisited,” EconoFact,
February 6, 2020.
   74. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Employment, Hours, and Earnings from the
Current Employment Statistics Survey (National), August 28, 2024.
   75. Mary Lovely, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China Playing
Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 6; David Autor et al., “Help
for the Heartland? The Employment and Electoral Effects of the Trump Tariffs in
the United States,” NBER Working Papers, January 2024; Pablo D. Fajgelbaum et al.,
“The Returns to Protectionism,” Quaterly Journal of Economics 135:1 (2020): 1–55.
   76. Jamieson Greer, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 16.
   77. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, Four-Year Review of Actions Taken in
the Section 301 Investigation: China’s Acts, Policies, and Practices Related to Technol-
ogy Transfer, Intellectual Property, and Innovation, May 14, 2024, 86.
   78. Chad P. Bown, “U.S.-China Trade War Tariffs: An Up-to-Date Chart,” April 6,
2023.
   79. Emily J. Blanchard, Chad P. Bown, and Davin Chor, “Did Trump’s Trade War
Impact the 2018 Election?” Journal of International Economics 148 (2024): 1–23; Da-
vid Autor et al., “Help for the Heartland? The Employment and Electoral Effects of
the Trump Tariffs in the United States,” NBER Working Papers, January 2024; Pablo
D. Fajgelbaum et al., “The Returns to Protectionism,” QJE 135:1 (2020): 1–55.
   80. Chad P. Bown, “The U.S.-China Trade War and Phase One Agreement,” Journal
of Policy Modeling 43 (2021): 818; Chad P. Bown, Euijin Jung, and Zhiyao (Lucy) Lu,
“China’s Retaliation to Trump’s Tariffs,” Peterson Institute for International Econom-
ics, June 22, 2018.
   81. Chad P. Bown, “The U.S.-China Trade War and Phase One Agreement,” Journal
of Policy Modeling 43 (2021): 818.
   82. Chad P. Bown, “The U.S.-China Trade War and Phase One Agreement,” Journal
of Policy Modeling 43 (2021): 816.
   83. Chad P. Bown, Eujin Jung, and Eva (Yiwen) Zhang, “Trump Has Gotten China
to Lower Its Tariffs. Just toward Everyone Else,” Peterson Institute for International
Economics, June 12, 2019.
   84. David Steinberg and Yeling Tan, “How Will China Respond to Biden’s Tariffs?
Look at Trump’s Trade War,” Peterson Institute for International Economics, May 30,
2024.
   85. Hunter L. Clark and Anna Wong, “Did the U.S. Bilateral Goods Deficit with
China Increase or Decrease during the US-China Trade Conflict?” Board of Gover-
nors of the Federal Reserve System, June 21, 2021; Edith Jia, “Export Tax Rebates
in China: Recent Changes and Risk Management,” China Briefing, May 2021; Julien
Gourdon et al., “Estimating the Repercussions from China’s Export Value-Added Tax
Rebate Policy,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 124:1 (January 2022): 244–245.
   86. Hunter L. Clark and Anna Wong, “Did the U.S. Bilateral Goods Deficit with
China Increase or Decrease during the US-China Trade Conflict?” Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, June 21, 2021.
                                       450
  87. Davin Chor and Bingjing Li, “Illuminating the Effects of the U.S.-China Tariff
War on China’s Economy,” Journal of International Economics 150 (July 2024): 17;
Zhiyuan Chen, Aksel Erbahar, and Yuan Zi, “Made and Created in China: The Role
of Processing Trade,” CEPR, March 13, 2020: 6.
  88. Davin Chor and Bingjing Li, “Illuminating the Effects of the U.S.-China Tariff
War on China’s Economy,” Journal of International Economics 150 (July 2024): 17–18.
  89. China’s General Administration of Customs, Customs Statistics, September 9,
2024.
  90. Maureen Thorson, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on U.S.-China Relations in 2021: Emerging Risks, Sep-
tember 8, 2021, 8; U.S. Department of Commerce International Trade Administration,
Determining Origin: Substantial Transformation.
  91. Flora Haberkorn et al., “Global Trade Patterns in the Wake of the 2018–2019
U.S.-China Tariff Hikes,” FED Notes, April 12, 2024; David Autor et al., “Help for
the Heartland? The Employment and Electoral Effects of the Trump Tariffs in the
United States,” NBER Working Papers, January 2024; Gene M. Grossman, Elhanan
Helpman, and Stephen J. Redding, “When Tariffs Disrupt Global Supply Chains,”
American Economic Review 114:4 (2024), 988–1029; Pablo Fajgelbaum et al., “The
U.S.-China Trade War and Global Reallocations,” NBER Working Papers, December
2023; Caroline Freund et al., “Is U.S. Trade Policy Reshaping Global Supply Chains,”
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, October 31, 2023; Han Qiu, Hyun Song
Shin, and Leanne Si Ying Zhang, “Mapping the Realignment of Global Value Chains,”
BIS Bulletin, October 3, 2023; Laura Alfaro and Davin Chor, “Global Supply Chains:
The Looming “Great Reallocation,” Paper prepared for the Jackson Hole Symposium,
August 30, 2023.
  92. Paul Wiseman, “Prospects of Low-Priced Chinese EVs Reaching U.S. from
Mexico Poses Threat to Automakers,” Associated Press, June 27, 2024; Kelsey Butler,
“BYD Mexico Plant Will Create 10,000 Jobs, Executive Says,” Bloomberg, June 20,
2024; Diego Oré, “Mexico, Facing U.S. Pressure, Will Halt Incentives for Chinese EV
Makers,” Reuters, April 18, 2024.
  93. Jamieson Greer, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 11.
  94. Jamieson Greer, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 10.
  95. Chad P. Bown, “US-China Trade War Tariffs: An Up-to-Date Chart,” Pe-
terson Institute for International Economics, April 6, 2023; Mary E. Lovely and
Yang Liang, “Trump Tariffs Primarily Hit Multinational Supply Chains, Harm
U.S. Technology Competitiveness,” Peterson Institute for International Economics,
May 2018.
  96. Mary E. Lovely and Yang Liang, “Trump Tariffs Primarily Hit Multinational
Supply Chains, Harm U.S. Technology Competitiveness,” Peterson Institute for Inter-
national Economics, May 2018.
  97. Mary Lovely, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China Playing
Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 8.
  98. Mary Lovely, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China Playing
Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 11.
  99. Jamieson Greer, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 13–16; Mary Lovely,
written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hear-
ing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China Playing Field: Trade,
Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2023, 11–12.
  100. White House, Remarks by National Economic Advisor Lael Brainard on Re-
sponding to the Challenges of China’s Industrial Overcapacity, May 16, 2024.
  101. Mary E. Lovely and Yang Liang, “Trump Tariffs Primarily Hit Multinational
Supply Chains, Harm U.S. Technology Competitiveness,” Peterson Institute for Inter-
national Economics, May 2018.
  102. U.S. Census Bureau, “Trade in Goods with China”; U.S. Department of Com-
merce Bureau of Economic Analysis, Gross Domestic Product.
  103. Mary Lovely, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China Playing
Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 8.
                                        451
   104. Kyle Handley, Fariha Kamal, and Ryan Monarch, “Supply Chain Adjustments
to Tariff Shocks: Evidence from Firm Trade Linkages in the 2018–2019 U.S. Trade
War,” NBER Working Papers, August 2023.
   105. U.S. Census Bureau, USA Trade Online, September 9, 2024.
   106. China General Administration of Customs, “CN: Export: Foreign Funded En-
terprise: Total,” via CEIC database; China General Administration of Customs, Ex-
planatory Notes of 2024, March 12, 2024.
   107. Mary Lovely and Yang Liang, “Trump Tariffs Primarily Hit Multinational
Supply Chains, Harm U.S. Technology Competitiveness,” Peterson Institute for Inter-
national Economics, May 2018, 2.
   108. China General Administration of Customs, “CN: Export: Foreign Funded En-
terprise: Total,” via CEIC database, 2024.
   109. Scott Kennedy, “The Private Sector Drives Growth in China’s High-Tech Ex-
ports,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, April 28, 2022.
   110. Export Control Reform Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115–232, codified at 50 U.S.C.
§ 4811, 2018.
   111. Export Control Reform Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115–232, codified at 50 U.S.C.
§ 4811, 2018.
   112. Export Control Reform Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115–232, codified at 50 U.S.C.
§ 4824, 2018.
   113. Karen M. Sutter and Christopher A. Casey, “U.S. Export Controls and China,”
Congressional Research Service CRS IF11627, March 24, 2022.
   114. Paul Kerr and Christopher Casey, “The U.S. Export Control System and the
Export Control Reform Act of 2018,” Congressional Research Service CRS R 46814,
June 7, 2021.
   115. Paul Kerr and Christopher Casey, “The U.S. Export Control System and the
Export Control Reform Act of 2018,” Congressional Research Service CRS R 46814,
June 7, 2021.
   116. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, Commerce
Control List (CCL); U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security,
About Licensing; U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security,
Country Guidance.
   117. Kevin Wolf, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 163; Paul Kerr
and Christopher Casey, “The U.S. Export Control System and the Export Control
Reform Act of 2018,” Congressional Research Service CRS R 46814, June 7, 2021;
Covington & Burling, “Export Control Reform Act Is Finalized in Congress,” July
30, 2018.
   118. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, Entity List;
U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, Policy Guidance
FAQs.
   119. U.S. Department of Commerce Commerce Adds China’s SMIC to the Entity
List, Restricting Access to Key Enabling U.S. Technology, December 18, 2020.
   120. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, Denied Per-
sons List; U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, Deemed
Exports.
   121. Matthew A. Goldstein, “Congress Focuses on China Risk at U.S. Colleges and
Universities,” Reuters, January 8, 2024.
   122. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, Foreign Di-
rect Product Rules.
   123. Kay C. Georgi and Sylvia G. Costelloe, “BIS Expands the Huawei Foreign
Direct Product Rule to Capture a Wide Swath of COTS Products,” ArentFox Schiff,
August 19, 2020; Jane Lee and Stephen Nellis, “Explainer: What Is ‘FDPR’ and Why
Is the U.S. Using It to Cripple China’s Tech Sector?” Reuters, October 8, 2022.
   124. Karen Freifeld, “Exclusive: New US Rule on Foreign Chip Equipment Exports
to China to Exempt Some Allies,” Reuters, July 31, 2024.
   125. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Chapter 4, Section
2, “Weapons, Technology, and Export Controls,” in 2023 Annual Report to Congress,
November 2023, 474.
   126. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, “Commerce
Control List: Controls on Certain Marine Toxins,” Federal Register 87:99 (May 23,
2022).
   127. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, “Commerce
Control List: Controls on Certain Marine Toxins,” Federal Register 87:99 (May 23,
2022).
                                        452
  128. Kevin Wolf, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China Playing
Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 30.
  129. Peter Harrell, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 2.
  130. Peter Harrell, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 2.
  131. Ben Murphy, “Chokepoints: China’s Self-Identified Strategic Technology Im-
port Dependencies,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, May 2022.
  132. Christopher A. Casey, “Export Controls–International Coordination: Issues for
Congress,” Congressional Research Service CRS R 47684, September 8, 2023, 2.
  133. Christopher A. Casey, “Export Controls–International Coordination: Issues for
Congress,” Congressional Research Service CRS R 47684, September 8, 2023, 2.
  134. Chris Miller and Jordan Schneider, “How to Stop Our High-Tech Equipment
from Arming Russia and China,” New York Times, December 29, 2023.
  135. Jamieson L. Greer, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024; Christopher A. Ca-
sey, “Export Controls–International Coordination: Issues for Congress,” Congressional
Research Service CRS R 47684, September 8, 2023, 2.
  136. Peter Harrell, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 3.
  137. Kevin Wolf, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China Playing
Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 3.
  138. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, Commerce
Implements New Export Controls on Advanced Computing and Semiconductor Man-
ufacturing Items to the People’s Republic of China (PRC), October 7, 2022.
  139. Raj Varadarajan et al., “Emerging Resilience in the Semiconductor Supply
Chain,” Boston Consulting Group and Semiconductor Industry Association, May 2024, 6.
  140. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, Commerce
Implements New Export Controls on Advanced Computing and Semiconductor Man-
ufacturing Items to the People’s Republic of China (PRC), October 7, 2022.
  141. Gregory C. Allen and Emily Benson, “Clues to the U.S.-Dutch-Japanese Semi-
conductor Export Controls Deal Are Hiding in Plain Sight,” Center for Strategic and
International Studies, March 1, 2023.
  142. Gregory C. Allen and Emily Benson, “Clues to the U.S.-Dutch-Japanese Semi-
conductor Export Controls Deal Are Hiding in Plain Sight,” Center for Strategic and
International Studies, March 1, 2023.
  143. Gregory C. Allen and Emily Benson, “Clues to the U.S.-Dutch-Japanese Semi-
conductor Export Controls Deal Are Hiding in Plain Sight,” Center for Strategic and
International Studies, March 1, 2023.
  144. Yuki Furukawa, “Japan Tightens Export Controls on More Chip and Quantum
Tech,” Bloomberg, April 26, 2024.
  145. Mackenzie Hawkins, Cagan Koc, and Yuki Furukawa, “US Seeks Allies’ Help
in Curbing China’s AI Chip Progress,” Bloomberg, June 18, 2024.
  146. Evelyn Cheng, “Major Global Chip Equipment Makers’ China Revenue Share
Has Doubled since U.S. Imposed Export Controls,” CNBC, July 23, 2024.
  147. Kolja Brockmann, “Non-Proliferation, Arms Control and Disarmament, the
Multilateral Export Control Regimes,” 2002, 578.
  148. Kevin Wolf, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China Playing
Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 9.
  149. Kevin Wolf, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China Playing
Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 169; Kevin Wolf and Emily
S. Weinstein, “COCOM’s Daughter?” WorldECR, May 2022.
  150. U.S. Department of Commerce, Joint Statement: Japan-Republic of Ko-
rea-United States Commerce and Industry Ministerial Meeting, June 26, 2024; Tom
Leithauser, “U.S., Japan, S. Korea Join Forces to Safeguard Disruptive Tech, (Apr 26,
2024),” Vital Law, April 26, 2024.
  151. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, Five Eyes
Partners Agree to Formalize Cooperation on Export Control Enforcement, June 28,
2023.
                                       453
   152. U.S. Department of State, Continued Progress on AUKUS Defense Trade In-
tegration, April 19, 2024; United Kingdom Ministry of Defense, Update on AUKUS
Export Reform Progress, April 19, 2024.
   153. Bryant Harris, “When Will AUKUS Allies Receive US Export Control Exemp-
tions?” Defense News, April 23, 2024.
   154. European Commission, “EU-US Trade and Technology Council”; U.S. Depart-
ment of State, U.S.-EU Trade and Technology Council (TTC).
   155. White House, U.S.-EU Joint Statement of the Trade and Technology Council,
May 31, 2023.
   156. Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, U.S-EU Joint Statement of the Trade
and Technology Council, April 8, 2024.
   157. Toby Sterling, Karen Freifeld, and Alexandra Alper, “Dutch to Restrict Semi-
conductor Tech Exports to China, Joining U.S. Effort,” Reuters, March 8, 2023.
   158. Julian Ringhof, “Setting the Tone: The Value of the EU-US Trade and Technol-
ogy Council,” European Council on Foreign Affairs, December 9, 2022.
   159. Emily Benson, “The Fifth Ministerial of the U.S.-EU Trade and Technology
Council,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, February 7, 2024; European
Commission, “White Paper on Export Controls,” January 24, 2024, 6.
   160. Hearing transcript for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commis-
sion, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China Playing Field:
Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 280–294.
   161. Kevin Wolf, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China Playing
Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 2.
   162. Kevin Wolf, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China Playing
Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 12.
   163. Natalie Liu, “How America Turned the Tables on Huawei,” Voice of America,
June 10, 2021.
   164. Natalie Liu, “How America Turned the Tables on Huawei,” Voice of America,
June 10, 2021.
   165. Matthew Eitel, “US China Tech Controls Face Problematic Diagnosis,” Center
for European Policy Analysis, May 13, 2024.
   166. Cagan Koc, “ASML’s China Sales Surge Highlights Risk of Tighter US Curbs,”
American Journal of Transportation, July 18, 2024.
   167. Gregory C. Allen, “In Chip Race, China Gives Huawei the Steering Wheel:
Huawei’s New Smartphone and the Future of Semiconductor Export Controls,” Cen-
ter for Strategic and International Studies, October 6, 2023.
   168. Matthew Eitel, “US China Tech Controls Face Problematic Diagnosis,” Center
for European Policy Analysis, May 13, 2024.
   169. Cheng Ting-fang and Shunsuke Tabeta, “Top China Chipmakers SMIC and
CXMT Push to Scrap Foreign Inputs,” Nikkei Asia, May 21, 2024.
   170. Bloomberg, “China Secretly Transforms Huawei into Most Powerful Chip War
Weapon,” December 1, 2023.
   171. Liza Lin, Stu Woo, and Raffaele Huang, “The U.S. Wanted to Knock Down
Huawei. It’s Only Getting Stronger,” Wall Street Journal, July 29, 2024.
   172. Liza Lin, Stu Woo, and Raffaele Huang, “The U.S. Wanted to Knock Down
Huawei. It’s Only Getting Stronger,” Wall Street Journal, July 29, 2024.
   173. Matthew Eitel, “Export Controls—The Keys to Forging a Transatlantic Tech
Shield,” Center for European Policy Analysis, July 20, 2023.
   174. Hanna Dohmen, Jacob Feldgoise, and Charles Kupchan, “The Limits of the
China Chip Ban,” Foreign Affairs, July 24, 2024.
   175. Gregory C. Allen, “In Chip Race, China Gives Huawei the Steering Wheel:
Huawei’s New Smartphone and the Future of Semiconductor Export Controls,” Cen-
ter for Strategic and International Studies, October 6, 2023.
   176. Christopher Cytera, “China’s Chip Challenge: Unlocking Huawei’s New
Smartphone,” Center for European Policy Analysis, September 25, 2023.
   177. David Kirton and Brenda Goh, “Exclusive: Huawei’s New Phone Uses More
China-Made Parts, Memory Chip,” Reuters, May 9, 2024.
   178. Liza Lin and Raffaele Huang, “Huawei Readies New Chip to Challenge Nvid-
ia, Surmounting U.S. Sanctions,” Wall Street Journal, August 13, 2024.
   179. Che Pan, “Tech War: China Advances in Chip Tool Self-Sufficiency but Lithog-
raphy Still a ‘Choke Point,’ ” South China Morning Post, August 7, 2024; Jacob Feld-
goise and Hanna Dohmen, “Pushing the Limits: Huawei’s AI Chip Tests U.S. Export
Controls,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, June 17, 2024.
   180. Matthew Eitel, “Export Controls—The Keys to Forging a Transatlantic Tech
Shield,” Center for European Policy Analysis, July 20, 2023.
                                         454
   181. Peter Harrell, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 3.
   182. William E. Pomeranz and Dan White, “The Sanctions Are Working–Just Ask
Russia’s Friends,” Wilson Center, February 27, 2024.
   183. Douglas Busvine, “Russia Finds Way around Sanctions on Battlefield Tech:
Report,” Politico, January 11, 2024.
   184. Olena Bilousova et al., “Challenges of Export Controls Enforcement: How
Russia Continues to Import Components for Its Military Production,” Kyiv School of
Economics, January 2024.
   185. White House, “Executive Order 14114 of December 22, 2023: Taking Addi-
tional Steps with Respect to the Russian Federation’s Harmful Activities,” Federal
Register 88:246 (December 26, 2023).
   186. Max Bergmann, et al., “Collaboration for a Price: Russian Military-Technical
Cooperation with China, Iran, and North Korea,” Center for Strategic and Interna-
tional Studies, May 22, 2024; Douglas Busvine, “Russia Finds Way around Sanctions
on Battlefield Tech: Report,” Politico, January 11, 2024; Office of the Director of Na-
tional Intelligence, “Support Provided by the People’s Republic of China to Russia,”
July 2023, 8–9.
   187. Greenberg Center for Geoeconomic Studies, “Chinese Investment in Critical
U.S. Technology: Risks to U.S. Security Interests,” Council on Foreign Relations, Oc-
tober 2017.
   188. Emily Benson and Gregory C. Allen, “A New National Security Instrument:
The Executive Order on Outbound Investment,” Center for Strategic and Internation-
al Studies, August 10, 2023.
   189. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis, “New Foreign
Direct Investment in the United States by Country [2014–2023],” August 13, 2023.
   190. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Balance of Pay-
ments and Direct Investment Position Data [2014–2023],” August 13, 2023.
   191. Bloomberg, “China Codifies Crackdown on ‘Irrational’ Outbound Investment,”
August 18, 2017.
   192. U.S. Department of the Treasury, The Committee on Foreign Investment in the
United States (CFIUS); Thilo Hanemann, Armand Meyer, and Danielle Goh, “Vanish-
ing Act: The Shrinking Footprint of Chinese Companies in the US,” Rhodium Group,
September 7, 2023.
   193. Cathleen D. Cimino-Isaacs, “CFIUS Reform under FIRRMA,” Congressional
Research Service CRS IF 10952, February 21, 2020, 1–2.
   194. Doreen M. Edelman and Christian C. Contardo, “CFIUS Doesn’t Mean Chi-
nese Companies Can’t Invest in the US,” Lowenstein Sandler, May 5, 2021.
   195. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, “FDI Inflows
(USD) [2013–2023],” April 2024.
   196. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, “FDI Inflows
(USD) [2013–2023],” April 2024.
   197. Michael E. Leiter et al., “CFIUS Goes Global: New FDI Review Processes Pro-
liferate, Old Ones Expand,” Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, January 19, 2022.
   198. United Nations Trade and Development, The Evolution of FDI Screening
Mechanisms, February 2023.
   199. James K. Jackson, “The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United
States (CFIUS),” Congressional Research Service CRS RL 33388, July 3, 2018, 49;
Kevin J. Wolf, Thomas J. McCarthy, and Andrew R. Schlossberg, “The Export Control
Reform Act and Possible New Controls on Emerging and Foundational Technologies,”
Akin, September 12, 2018.
   200. Christopher Padilla, written testimony for U.S. Senate Committee on Bank-
ing, Housing and Urban Affairs, Hearing on CFIUS Reform: Examining the Essential
Elements, January 18, 2018; Clifford Chance, “FIRRMA: Addressing the ‘Weaponiza-
tion’ of Cross-Border Investment through CFIUS Reform?” February 2018, 5.
   201. Cathleen D. Cimino-Isaacs and Karen M. Sutter, “Regulation of U.S. Out-
bound Investment to China,” Congressional Research Service CRS IF 12629, August
12, 2024, 1.
   202. Matt Pottinger, written testimony for U.S. House of Representatives Commit-
tee on Foreign Affairs, Hearing on Examining the Flow of U.S. Money into China’s
Military Might, January 17, 2024.
   203. Sarah Bauerle Danzman, statement for the record for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling
the U.S.-China Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 3.
   204. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Direct Invest-
ment by Country and Industry [2023],” July 20, 2024.
                                       455
  205. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Direct Invest-
ment by Country and Industry [2023],” July 20, 2024.
  206. Carol C. Bertaut, Beau Bressler, and Stephanie Curcuru, “Globalization and
the Geography of Capital Flows,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
FEDS Notes, December 15, 2023.
  207. Carol C. Bertaut, Beau Bressler, and Stephanie Curcuru, “Globalization and
the Geography of Capital Flows,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
FEDS Notes, December 15, 2023.
  208. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Direct Invest-
ment by Country and Industry [2022],” July 20, 2023.
  209. Carol C. Bertaut, Beau Bressler, and Stephanie Curcuru, “Globalization and
the Geography of Capital Flows,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
FEDS Notes, December 15, 2023; Derek Scissors, written testimony for U.S. House of
Representatives Select Committee on the Strategic Competition between the United
States and the Chinese Communist Party, Hearing on Ensuring U.S. Leadership in
the Critical and Emerging Technologies of the 21st Century, July 26, 2023, 2.
  210. Carol C. Bertaut, Beau Bressler, and Stephanie Curcuru, “Globalization and
the Geography of Capital Flows,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
FEDS Notes, December 15, 2023.
  211. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Internation-
al Economic Accounts: Concepts and Methods, June 2024, 17.
  212. Derek Scissors, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 2–4.
  213. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis, Legal Authority
and Confidentiality of International Survey Collections, February 19, 2019; Derek
Scissors, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commis-
sion, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China Playing Field:
Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024; Carol C. Bertaut, Beau Bressler,
and Stephanie Curcuru, “Globalization and the Geography of Capital Flows,” Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System FEDS Notes, December 15, 2023; U.S.
Department of the Treasury, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, Aggregate Holdings, Purchases and Sales, and Fair
Value Changes of Long-Term Securities by U.S. and Foreign Residents (Tic Slt), May
2021, 8.
  214. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Direct Invest-
ment by Country and Industry [2022],” July 20, 2023.
  215. Derek Scissors, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 2.
  216. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis, Legal Authority
and Confidentiality of International Survey Collections, February 19, 2019.
  217. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Direct Invest-
ment by Country and Industry [2022],” U.S. Direct Investment Position Abroad on a
Historical-Cost Basis, By Country and Industry [2022],” July 20, 2023.
  218. Derek Scissors, oral testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China Playing
Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 217–218.
  219. U.S. Department of Treasury, Frequently Asked Questions Regarding the TIC
System and TIC Data, October 2, 2023.
  220. Derek Scissors, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 3; Carol C. Bertaut,
Beau Bressler, and Stephanie Curcuru, “Globalization and the Geography of Capital
Flows,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System FEDS Notes, December
15, 2023.
  221. Carol C. Bertaut, Beau Bressler, and Stephanie Curcuru, “Globalization and
the Geography of Capital Flows,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
FEDS Notes, December 15, 2023.
  U.S. Department of the Treasury, Frequently Asked Questions Regarding the TIC
System and TIC Data.
  222. Sarah Bauerle Danzman, statement for the record for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling
the U.S.-China Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 2.
  223. Sarah Bauerle Danzman, statement for the record for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling
the U.S.-China Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 2.
                                       456
   224. Sarah Bauerle Danzman, statement for the record for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling
the U.S.-China Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 4.
   225. Sarah Bauerle Danzman, statement for the record for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling
the U.S.-China Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 3.
   226. Sarah Bauerle Danzman, statement for the record for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling
the U.S.-China Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 3.
   227. Sarah Bauerle Danzman, statement for the record for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling
the U.S.-China Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 3.
   228. Emily S. Weinstein and Ngor Luong, “U.S. Outbound Investment into Chi-
nese AI Companies,” Center for Security and Emerging Technologies, February
2023.
   229. Sarah Bauerle Danzman, statement for the record for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling
the U.S.-China Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 4.
   230. Sarah Bauerle Danzman, statement for the record for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling
the U.S.-China Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 4.
   231. Sarah Bauerle Danzman, statement for the record for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling
the U.S.-China Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 3.
   232. Derek Scissors, written statement for The House Select Committee on the
Chinese Communist Party, Ensuring U.S. Leadership in the Critical and Emerging
Technologies of the 21st Century, June 26, 2023, 5–6.
   233. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Investment Security, FACT SHEET:
Treasury Department Issues Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on Implementation of
Outbound Investment Executive Order (E.O. 14105), June 21, 2024; Emily Kilcrease,
written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hear-
ing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China Playing Field: Trade,
Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 5.
   234. Sean O’Connor, “How Chinese Companies Facilitate Technology Transfer from
the United State,” U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, May 9,
2019, 7.
   235. White House, “Executive Order 14105 of August 9, 2023: Addressing United
States Investments in Certain National Security Technologies and Products in Coun-
tries of Concern,” Federal Register 88:154 (August 11, 2023).
   236. Emily S. Weinstein and Ngor Luong, “U.S. Outbound Investment into Chinese
AI Companies,” Center for Security and Emerging Technologies, February 2023; Derek
Scissors, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commis-
sion, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China Playing Field:
Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 6.
   237. Sarah Bauerle Danzman, statement for the record for U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling
the U.S.-China Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 2;
Carol C. Bertaut, Beau Bressler, and Stephanie Curcuru, “Globalization and the Ge-
ography of Capital Flows,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System FEDS
Notes, December 15, 2023; U.S. Department of Treasury, Frequently Asked Questions
Regarding the TIC System and TIC Data.
   238. Derek Scissors, written testimony for U.S.-China Economic and Security Re-
view Commission, Hearing on Key Economic Strategies for Leveling the U.S.-China
Playing Field: Trade, Investment, and Technology, May 23, 2024, 7–8.
   239. U.S. Security and Exchange Commission, Should My Company “Go Public”?
June 29, 2024.
   240. International Monetary Fund, “Derived Portfolio Investment Liabilities (All
Economies) by Economy of Nonresident Holder: Total Portfolio Investment (Derived
from Creditor Data),” June 2023.
   241. International Monetary Fund, “Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey–Geo-
graphic Breakdown of Total Portfolio Investment Assets: Total Portfolio Investment,”
June 2023.
   242. International Monetary Fund, “Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey–Geo-
graphic Breakdown of Total Portfolio Investment Assets: Total Portfolio Investment,”
June 2023; White House, G7 Leaders’ Statement on Economic Resilience and Econom-
ic Security, May 20, 2023.
                                       457
   243. Jason Matheny, written testimony for U.S. House of Representatives Commit-
tee on Foreign Affairs, Hearing on Examining the Flow of U.S. Money into China’s
Military Might, January 17, 2024, 2.
   244. Arms Control Association, “The Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) at a Glance,”
March 2022; Arms Control Association, “The Wassenaar Arrangement at a Glance,”
February 2022; Arms Control Association, “The Missile Technology Control Regime at
a Glance,” March 2021; Arms Control Association, “The Australia Group at a Glance,”
March 2021; Kolja Brockmann, “Non-Proliferation, Arms Control and Disarmament,
The Multilateral Export Control Regimes,” Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute, 2020, 578–586.
   245. White House, “Executive Order 14105 of August 9, 2023: Addressing United
States Investments in Certain National Security Technologies and Products in Coun-
tries of Concern,” Federal Register 88:154 (August 11, 2023).
   246. Paul Haenle, “How Biden’s New Outbound Investment Executive Order Will
Impact U.S.-China Relations,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, August
15, 2023; White House, “Executive Order 14105 of August 9, 2023: Addressing United
States Investments in Certain National Security Technologies and Products in Coun-
tries of Concern,” Federal Register 88:154 (August 11, 2023).
   247. White House, “Executive Order 14105 of August 9, 2023: Addressing United
States Investments in Certain National Security Technologies and Products in Coun-
tries of Concern,” Federal Register 88:154 (August 11, 2023).
   248. U.S. Department of the Treasury Office of Investment Security, “Provisions
Pertaining to U.S. Investments in Certain National Security Technologies and Prod-
ucts in Countries of Concern,” Federal Register 88:155 (August 2023).
   249. U.S. Department of the Treasury Office of Investment Security, “Provisions
Pertaining to U.S. Investments in Certain National Security Technologies and Prod-
ucts in Countries of Concern,” Federal Register 88:155 (August 2023).
   250. White House, “Executive Order 14105 of August 9, 2023: Addressing United
States Investments in Certain National Security Technologies and Products in Coun-
tries of Concern,” Federal Register 88:154 (August 11, 2023); U.S. Department of the
Treasury Office of Investment Security, “Provisions Pertaining to U.S. Investments
in Certain National Security Technologies and Products in Countries of Concern,”
Federal Register 88:155 (August 2023).
   251. U.S. Department of the Treasury, “Provisions Pertaining to U.S. Investments
in Certain National Security Technologies and Products in Countries of Concern,”
Federal Register 89:129 (July 5, 2024).
   252. John Cheretis et al., “Treasury Department Unveils Long-Anticipated Pro-
posed Regulations for U.S. Outbound Investment Regime,” Jones Day, July 9, 2024.
   253. Christopher Adams et al., “U.S. Launches Outbound Investment Screening
Targeting China with Further Developments Forthcoming,” Covington, August 11,
2023; Emily Benson and Gregory C. Allen, “A New National Security Instrument: The
Executive Order on Outbound Investment,” Center for Strategic and International
Studies, August 10, 2023.
   254. Jen Fernandez, James Mendenhall, and Lauren Shapiro, “U.S. Treasury Is-
sues New Proposed Regulations on Outbound Investments in Chinese-Affiliated En-
tities,” Sidney Austin, July 9, 2024.
   255. Janet K. Kim, Sylwia A. Lis, and Rob O’Brien, “US Treasury Department Is-
sues Proposed Rules Restricting US Outbound Investment in Advanced Technologies
Involving China,” Baker McKenzie, June 25, 2024.
